[Music] I'm still ass. [Music] >> Let's get started. Uh, lot to cover. Round of applause for DJ Dash. Again, thank you for keeping everything fresh. All right, so I said a lot to cover today. Uh, plus we have a guest speaker, so I'm going to jump right into it and try to get much as we can uh cover as much as we can today. All right, so last class was the last lecture we did or the the previous lecture we we sort of wrapped up our discussion on what the storage layer of the database system

looks like. Right down on disk. We already talked about buffer pools and how to bring bring those into memory. So now we're going to start going up the up the stack. You remember this diagram from the beginning of the semester where now we're going to start talking about how we're going to build the support infrastructure in a database system to start executing queries. So we're going to be sort of this middle layer here what I call sort of call access methods. It's basically what the API the API

we're going to expose to the operator execution the execution end up above to get down get access to the data that we want. So today and uh for the next next week as well, we're actually talk about data structures. We're going to build on top of our buff pool manager pages now that we can use to store data for a variety of reasons. So today's class will be about hash tables uh so unordered data structures and then all next week will be about trees or order data structures. So again we're going to

talk about the background about why we want to do this, why we need our own data structures, why you don't want to use STL vector for the stuff that we want to do. Um and then we'll quickly talk about what hash functions look like. Uh the then we'll talk about two approaches to do hashts. The first will be static hashing schemes where you assume the size of the hash table is fixed. Uh and then there'll be dynamic hashing schemes will be uh a data structure that can grow and shrink

depending on the number of keys that you're going to put in it. And in a database system, you're typically going to need both of these, right? Because as we'll see in a second, we're going to use these data structures for uh a bunch of things. and then we'll finish off with a uh guest lecture from the Yugabyte co-ounder. Okay, sorry. Um these data structures we're going to build here are going to be used again all throughout the database system for a variety of things. Obviously, we can use

them for table indexes. That's probably what you're most familiar with at this point. Like how do I take a primary key or a secondary key, do a lookup to then find the record ID that's going to be on some uh some, you know, table page. But we're also going to use it for internal things like the the metadata like the catalog of of the database. We talked about the page directory is this hash table structure we use to look up to find the location of of pages within files. We can also use this for the core

data storage itself. We saw this before when we talked about index organized storage. We said that instead of having these unordered heap pages for our tupils, we're actually going to store the tupils in the leaf nodes of of a tree data structure. Typically a boss tree. And then another one that we'll that we're going to uh see as well, but we'll see mostly when we talk about query execution, we actually we can use these data structures for temporary data storage. So when we do a hash join,

we're going to join two tables. If we're doing a hash join, we're going to build a hash table, one of the hash tables we're talking about today, populate it, do the join, and then immediately throw it away. But because we may end up building a hash table that's larger than the amount of memory that's available to us because we're trying to join uh some large tables then we're going to back that you know that hash table by the buffer manager. So it can spill to disc

if we run out of space. Right? So again the data structure we'll come out the next two weeks are going to be all all throughout our system. And we're not going to want to use in many cases the things you can get off the shelf like a third party library or the STDL or pick your favorite Rust Crate because those are going to be typically not backed by the buffer pool manager, right? They're going to be backed by Malo. Uh we can't override Malo, but it's still going to be OS memory that's

ephemeral. System crashes, you lose whatever is in there. And if you're not in memory, it's going to start thrashing on its own. Uh the OS is going to do that for you. And that's not and we don't want that to happen. we'll take we want we want to control everything. So there'll be two main decisions that we have and in how we're going going to design these data structures because it's going to be slightly different than maybe you've seen in your previous algorithms class because we're going to

make trade-offs again about how we're going to choose what data structure the internals of the data structure based on the properties we said we cared about earlier in the semester where we want to maximize the amount of sequential IO rather than random IO. So that means there'll be some things may seem more inefficient uh to do versus versus if something was entirely in memory but we're going to do that because we can convert uh you know random writes and random reads to sequential rights and sequential reads

and that's going to be faster for us. So today's class is we're going to mostly focus on the data organization side like basically how we're going to represent the data structure internally like the actual physical thing we're going to store in memory on disk pages. There's another challenging thing we have to worry about, but we'll cover this in in two weeks of how do we make sure that our data structures are thread safe, right? How do we how do we allow for concurrent access multiple threads

reading and writing to our data structure at the same time and doing in such a way that it's safe to to do these operations and not worry about you know you changing some the some pointer address and then all a sudden some other thread reads that and goes off to the middle of nowhere and you seg. So we for today's uh today's discussion and then ne Monday's next class we're we're going to assume that our data structures are single threaded and there's only one thread going to access the time. So

understand the basics and then we'll see how to add latches and protect things later on. But there'll be other weird things that come up too why we don't want to talk about concurrency uh stuff at this point because there's a higher level notion of correctness that we're not going to worry about just yet. But like say if I my one thread deletes something I I sorry I insert a key somebody else some other thread deletes that key now I go back and try to read that same key and I don't see it. Is

that correct? At the lowest level at the physical level yes at a logical level maybe not that if that doesn't make sense don't worry we'll cover that later. That's not this class. All right so the h the I said the the the data structure we're going to focus on today is hash tables. And again, everyone should have taken basic CS classes that that I've described this before. So nothing I'm saying here should be uh should be brand wildly new to anyone. But it's basically an

unordered associate array that allows us to map arbitrary keys to arbitrary values. And at its core, the way this is going to work is there be some kind of hash function, which I'll talk about in a second, that we're going to use to take our key, which could be any of any arbitrary length, run through a hash function. It's then going to compute some some integer representation of that data and then we're going to use that to figure out where where would we want to jump to in our hash table to find the

data that we're looking for. Right? So the space complexity of a hash table is going to be n where n is the defined as the the the number of keys that I expect to store in my data structure. Now in many cases I may actually not store exactly n, right? I actually want to be less than that. Sometimes you you say you just double the size you expect to store and that's what you want to allocate it as. So N could be like the 2N which of reality for the time complexity on average it's going to be 01

because we're going to assume that we have a way to take our our key that we want to find hash it and then we we jump some some offset in our data structure and lo and behold there's the data that we're looking for. So average case is 01. Worst case is O. Meaning I had to scan all the keys individually one by one to find the thing that that I'm looking for. Right? So now if you've taken an algorithms class, all the theoreticians see that 01 and they start salivating like oh man that's great. Oh,

I don't care about anything else. And I think we sort of mentioned this early in the semester. In the database world, we do care about these constants. And even though it is 01, there's going to be a big difference in performance based on how you actually implement these things. Right? So if I do if it takes me my hash function is something really stupid and it takes me 100 milliseconds to compute the hash to find out where to jump to find the data that I want. Uh yeah, it's 01, but like I have a faster hash

function that do this in one millisecond, right? And that's two orders of magnitude difference for one look lookup. Maybe not a big deal. But again, think always in larger scales. If I'm doing a billion lookups, then that, you know, that extra 99 milliseconds is going to add up. So in the database world, we care about constants because at the end of the day, that's going to equal money because if I can have a more efficient data structure where even though it's still 01 theoretical, but

the constant time it is to do these operations is smaller and smaller, then I can store more data. I I can uh run my workload on a smaller machine. And at large scale again this you save real money. All right. So let's look at a sort of straw man proposal. Most simplest hash table you can imagine of what I'll call a static hash table. All right. Think it's just again it's a giant array of memory. Uh and instead of calling them frames like we did in the buffer pool, we'll call them slots and they'll be

locations where in our in our array where where we can store data. And so to to make this work, we're going to we're going to assume that we know the number of keys ahead of time. So say big n. And to now find any key that we want, assuming we're going to be storing integers, right? We're just going to take whatever that key is, mod it by the the n the number of uh the number of slots that we have. Actually, that could be yeah, it's little n at the top, big n at the bottom. They're the same. So just

just ignore the difference there. Right. So I can take any key that I want, hash it, and then it'll tell me where that that location is uh in in uh my slot array and then now I can maintain a uh in the slot array itself. I'll have basically just pointers to some other location uh in memory or other pages with the actual data that I want, right? Right? And I have to store the original key and the value because if I start jumping into the array I and I land at some location uh in my my sort

of data payload area, I got to know whether I'm actually having looking at the same same key or not, right? So this is unrealistic for a couple reasons. One is I assume that I know exactly the number of elements or the number of keys ahead of time. And in real world systems, that's almost never the case. Right. The way to get around that, you could do one pass of the data, c count the number of records, then do another pass and then populate your hash table. Some systems do that. Uh but in general,

we can't assume that's the case. And we can also maybe assume in some cases that the the number of keys isn't going to shrink or grow over time. The other big assumption here is that we're assuming that each key is unique and therefore when I do my hash uh and I land in my my slot array and it tells me where to go find the data that I want uh I know that there isn't going to be something else in my slot array for for another record that need to find right and to make that work I got to have

actually basically allocate all of the the possible key space that I could ever have so n even though I may not actually have it all or may estate may be wrong but that's going to avoid having any any collisions. And the last one is a uh some more slightly theoretical discussion but the when we run these hash functions often times we're we're not going to end up with uh like two distinct keys could end up hashing to the same same value. And so there is a sort of class of algorithms or class of methods called perfect

hashing where you have a hash function that guarantees that there there will never be any conflicts and think of like if I have a number from one to a thousand a hash function could just be returned that number because you know because I won't have any conflicts right but if I'm trying to map a a larger key space into a smaller one then I can't assume that be a perfect hash Right. So the way you do a perfect hash is you basically have to pass over the data once, make sure that there's no

conflicts uh and then sort of maintain another hash table uh that maps the original key to its location in the slot. So like I'm building a hash table for my hash table and that's not entirely practical. You can cheat in some cases. You can say like if I know the top 10 keys then I'll have like if then else's that that sort of bypass the hash function. But as far as I know, no system does that. Okay. So at its core, what is when what is a hash table? Most people think it's like

it's the actual data structure itself, but it's actually a combination of things. The first is going to be what the hash function we're going to use again to take the arbitrary key space and map it to a smaller domain. And we'll see in a second. And there'll be this trade-off between how fast we want our hash function to be versus how how how many collisions I could potentially have. And then the second piece will be the hashing scheme. So within my data structure now, if I have keys hashed to

the same location in my hash table, what do I do? Like what's the protocol to decide how to resolve this that that conflict, right? And we'll see we'll see sort of two examples how to do this, but there's there's a bunch of ones people have developed over the years. So once you add sort of the hash function, you have a hashing scheme, then you have the storage space you want to put the things, then you have your your hash table. Okay. All right. So let's quickly talk about

hash functions. Um I'll just give you the basics of what you need to know as as when you build a data system, but the truth be told, we don't actually don't care what the algorithm is going to be. And I don't think it's worth our time to even discuss, you know, how to build a good hash function. There's other classes that do that. So for us, we're actually just use something that's off the shelf, right? And most systems are most of the newer systems are going to do this. Very few newer systems build

their own hash functions, right? So again, a hash function is pretty basic. It's the idea is it's a a one-way hash. So given some key of arbitrary length, we want to do some some computation on it to then generate a random 32 or 64-bit integer, right? And again, the thing that we care about is we want to something to be fast as possible and have a low collision rate. What's the fastest hash function you could build? >> Identity faster >> one or zero and return a constant

because that's going to sit in a register, right? So if I pass you a string, I got to send you back the string. Sending back zero one would be way faster than that. But the collision rate is terrible, right? No matter what key I give you, no matter what email address I give you, the value is going to return zero or one. So that's not a good one. The opposite end of the spectrum would be that perfect hash function where I have a bunch of elaborate infrastructure to guarantee that no matter what key you give me, I'm

going to give you a unique hash. Right? So again, the idea is that we're trying to convert these arbitrary length strings or whatever these keys we're putting in. We want to always then generate a fixed length value. So we don't care about any cryptographic properties of this hash function and we don't care about the hash being reversible. So I don't care about taking whatever you hash me the hash you give me and giving back the original value. Right? This is all for the internals of

the database system. We're not leaking any information on the outside. We're not worried about people uh you know trying to do like an attack on us to like uh o overload something or give me keys that always hash at the same location so I I slow things down. Right? That's not our problem. We're not worried about those things. This is all in the inside. We're not we're not going to expose these hash values to the outside world. Yes. >> Yes. >> So if you have the page and the stop

number you already know >> statement is earlier before we talked about if we had the record ID uh and that from that we can get like the page number and the offset. >> Why do we need the page numbers or can we get the is that or you can't get the page set >> the record ID in in some systems are typically going to be the the page number and the offset. >> So then >> you don't need a hash table. >> I'm asking you already >> you don't. So hold on. So so going back

here um we're going to use this hash table for a bunch of things this right. So table indexes just using that that's the simplest one to think about. If think of something like a like a higher level key like a secondary key or like a primary key and the primary key is your email address. So I do a query select star from table where email address equals yours. How do I then get the record ID that the table edx will give me that? >> Yes. But I also want to emphasize that the things we're talking about today

this data structure isn't just for that. We're going to use it to do joins. We're going to use it to maintain other internal metadata. You're a buffer pool manager in project one. You guys are using what? STL unordered map or something, right? Well, again, if you crash, what happens? That map is gone. But say you wanted to make sure that this the um well, you could replace that SDL map with one of these hash tables that we're talking about here today and not use the SDL one because you think

you can do a better job than that. You usually can. Although the Google uh data structure library up cell is actually pretty good. The Facebook follow one's pretty good too. But again, that's not going to be backed by our full manager. All right. So again, we don't care about cryptography. We don't care about denial service attacks. This is all in the internal. We're not exposed in the outside world. So I just want to quickly talk about what options are available to you. Um and it's almost 20 years now,

but there's sort of this new there was this resurgence interest in hash functions for database systems uh in 2008 started by murmurash. and it was like some random guy on on GitHub or something just posted like here's my really good hash function and a bunch of data systems picked it up and started using it and over the years there's been improvements to it. Um the main takeaway is going to be the uh the the state-of-the-art one that's considered the fastest right now is Rapid Hash. Uh

but as far as I know, no data system uses Rapid Hash yet because it's like too new. Most of the newer systems are use XS hash or XS hash3, right? So in general, this is going what what you're going to want to use. And that's it. That's all you know about hash functions. String in or data bite array in 64-bit integer out xx hash would be fast. Let's use that. Okay. >> You could use rabbit hash. I'm saying sorry their statement is why can't we use rabbit hash? You can. Uh I Yeah. So

maybe state of the art is both of them, but nobody use nobody uses this one yet as far as I know. I I haven't gpped all of GitHub of like to see where it shows up in any data system because we have all the GitHub accounts. Uh we have all the GitHub URLs for every data system that's open source. So we could check but I think we checked last year and nobody was using it. All right. So again assuming we have some hash function for our purposes going forward in this rest of this lecture. We don't care how it's actually

being implemented. We just know if we give it some bite array we'll get some integer out. Okay. All right. So first we're going to talk about static hashing schemes. Again the idea here is that you specify when you allocate the data structure the the number of potential locations where you could want to store uh store records for information uh you know the number of slots that you want in in your implementation. Right? We'll see dynamic hashing in a second and again that'll be a hash table that can grow and shrink uh

with more or less keys o over time. With static hashing you sort of allocate things at the very beginning and that's it. So we're going to talk about basically the the two most common approaches linear pro hashing and cuckoo hashing. Linear pro hashing is used everywhere. Uh it's the most common one. It's actually the most simple one and this is going to be a good example where simple is actually better. Uh it's actually more performant than than all these other fancy ones. So if you take

the advanced base class we'll cover all the again all the various things people developed over the years. Robin Hood hashing, hopscot hashing, twist tables. Um there's another category of hash tables we're not talking about in this class called concise hash tables or memory efficient hash tables and this is where again you know you're going to be doing a say doing a hash join uh and I'm going to build my data structure they immediately throw it away so I want something that is compact as small as

possible because I'm not worried about you know building the hash table and then an hour later someone coming someone come along and try to insert something into it or delete things right so the one thing I understand is that the the the terminology starts to overlap and gets kind of confusing with these things. So, I'm gonna be talking about linear probe hashing and there'll be another hash table called linear hashing that I'll cover at the end of the the of the class. That's a dynamic hashing

scheme. Linear probe hashing is a uh static hashing scheme. And these are also used in a category called open addressing or open open addressing algorithms for hashts. And this just basically means that the location of a key in my hash table is open. Meaning it could be anywhere. There's no guarantee that if I insert the same key uh multiple if I insert the same key in my data structure at different times, it's always going to be in the exact same location. It's allowed to move. It's

allowed to be in different locations. And so the hash function is basically going to give us a way to jump into the hash table at least as a starting point. And then we may have to look around, do some scan some data to find the the the key that we're actually looking for. Uh there's no guarantee it's exactly in that location. It'll make more sense when I show examples. Again, LED pro hashing is the most basic one, but it's it's used in a lot of systems. All right. So the way think about the

hash table, it's just again it's a giant table of fixed length slots and it can be backed by pages in our bufferable manager. And so what's going to work how it's going to work is that the when we hash into our hash table, if there's another key in the location where our key wants to go into, then we know that space is being occupied and we have to scan down linearly like looking at one one one slot after other till we find a free slot. And once we find the free slot, then we can put our key in and then

we're done, right? And assertions are basically the deletions are basically assertions and deletions and searches all sort of work the sort of the same way. We do have to keep track when we start scanning through where we started when we enter the hash table. So because we'll loop back around and we come back to the original location, we don't want to get stuck in an instant loop because we know the hash table is full. And then depending on what our operation is, uh we may may have to stop what we're doing

and resize things. So the in most implicitations there'll be this notion of the load factor which is basically the number of actively used slots divided or over the number of total slots and when that gives above gets above some threshold then the system will say well I think I'm getting too big and I'm going to run out of space let me halt all any operations again assum you take a global latch on the whole data structure allocate a new hash table that's twice the size of the original one take all the keys out and

put it to the new That sucks. That's really slow. Uh this is again why you typically allocate that the the hash rate would be a little bit larger than what you expect to actually put in it. So you don't have to do that. And then but some systems allow you to play around with this uh this load factor to say like ah I allow myself to be allow myself to be 99% full before I have to resize. All right. So let's go for a simple example. So I'm showing this on PowerPoint. Again, it's it's it's a

diagram, but assume that these page this data is being stored in in bufferable pages that are being backed by disk. So, I have my hash function and then I have the uh N defined as the number of slots that I have. So, if I want to insert key A, I'm going to hash it, modify number n, and it's going to land in that slot there. And in this case here, my hash table is empty, the slot is empty, so my key A can go right in there. And again, I have to store the key and the value together. Uh the value

actually may be a pointer to something else. We'll cover that in a second. But like I need the original key because if now I start having collisions and I start changing the location of where the key I'm actually inserting is, not the original one where I started off, then I need to know whether the the slot I'm looking at contains the thing that I want. I insert B hash at the top. That's fine. Now I insert C. Now I have a collision. C wants to go where A is, but it can't because A is sitting there. So, we

basically recognize that the slot is is occupied. Do a linear scan to the next free slot. We see that it's empty or the next slot. See that it's empty. And then we uh we can go ahead and start our key there. Same thing for D. D wants B where C is. It's occupied. Uh so it has to scan down and put D there. E wants to go where A is. Can't go where C is. Can't go where D is. We finally find a free slot there. And just to finish off, we'll put F wants to go over where E is and it goes

to the bottom, right? Pretty easy, right? And because we're doing a bunch of linear operate or sequential operations, right? If I have to read multiple pages from disk, I can read these pages in squal order till I find the free slot that I want. All right. So, how do I make sure that uh you know that that my entries or the data I'm storing is only fixed length, right? So, if the data I want to store is is is fixed length, then I can just inline it in with the data structure itself. So, I have I can also store the

hash. It sort of makes things go faster, right? Because I want to compare the hash whatever I have in there plus the the hash to the thing I'm trying to put in there. I can store the hash there, but space versus compute trade-off, right? You take takes more takes more space, but makes the the lookup go faster. But if my value fit fits in just fine, that and it's uh I can destroy this inline. Obviously, I don't want it too wide now because now the size that I'm jumping from slot to slot gets

really big and it can become wasteful. Yes. This is stoing it. >> Yeah. His question is this is doing inserts. How do you find things? This is the same thing, right? So say I I was I have F. I want to look for F. I hash it. I land where E is. E is not what I want. I keep scanning till I find the value that I want or a free slot, an empty slot. Meaning because I know my key can't be in there because if it existed, I would have seen it when I was scanning through. That's as we said in the beginning. O

worst case scenario I read everything keep track where I started so I don't keep going. >> Yeah. All right. So uh if if our data is small and it's fixed length we just store it in the hasht itself. If our uh data is is variable length or too big, then we'd end up basically store some kind of record ID or a pointer or something to a temp page uh and just have the the the data we want be chucked in there. If we're storing this as an index like a table index, then the record ID would just be

to the original tupil. But if again building a hash sorry building a hash before a join I don't want to maybe reference the original data because I might have may have manipulated or done some other joins prior to that. So I need to sort of tempt pages to put data that I want. But it's the same mechanism to have a pointer to say okay you want the value after you find a match here's where to go find it. >> Yes. This question is if you have a JSON field in a tuple when you >> Yes. Yes.

But like if it's if it's variable length, I don't want it in the I don't want it I can't put it in the in my slot array because that breaks the whole mechanism of taking the hash of the key and then modify the number of slots. So it's variable length. I'm going to jump to random locations. I can't do that. So I can't put it in there. I got to put it somewhere else. So I'm just saying here is like you just have this sort of temp thing where the key that you trying to you look up on is

now in this other temp space that could be variable length be slotted pages whatever you want doesn't matter and then now in my hash table I'm storing fixed length record ids >> you see statement is and he's correct like wouldn't you want to store the keys in the hash table to make it fast as possible yes but if they're var length you can't do that because now now all your slots Yes. So you the trick you could do would be uh say you're storing var strings. I could take the first like

eight characters store that in my hash table. Right. Still need the record ID to get the original one. But at least now I can just look for the prefix and see whether that matches. >> What's that? >> This is German strings. Yes. Uh uh German uh German strings basically says like instead of when we had that um the overflow page we had the uh you know we didn't want to inline the variable link data we had a pointer to it but in order to see if I have a match on that var link data I got to follow that pointer

so I can just store a prefix to do the early matching right and it was invented by the Germans I called it German strings and apparently that's the the term everyone using now uh but yeah German strings. All right. So, not all the hash tables in our systems don't won't care about deletes. But again, if they're table indexes, you do. So, how are we going to handle that? So, the idea again, so say I want to delete key C. So, I do my hash. I mod it. I land where A is. A is not the key that I'm looking for. I jump

down to C. Here's C. I want to go ahead and delete it. And I can just remove it. >> Yes. large expand the size. >> Uh the question the same is uh when the load factor gets too large without deleting just deterine in general or or this example here >> yeah the state the question is uh when the load factor gets too large do I have to resize the table? Yes, you you allocate a whole second table scan through and hash hash put back in the new one. Yes, dynamic hashing won't do

that. We'll see that in a second. All right. Is this a good idea or a bad idea? What did I do here? I deleted key C. I just removed it from my slot. >> Yes, he's he's pathetic here. The statement is if now something wants to do a lookup on D. Well, D is going to hash where C was because it was occupied when when we try to insert D, uh, it had to go to the slot below it. So, it's going to hash here now, land to where C used to be. See that it's empty. And again, the protocol for deciding whether

key exists or not is I keep scanning till I find it or I see an empty slot, then I'm done. So, it's going to see an empty slot right away and think that nothing's there and we're screwed, right? So there's two approaches to handle this. One is basically what what we talked about before, but like resizing the table. You basically just move everything around. So you figure out with the key that you deleted, scan everything afterwards until you find the the first free slot and rehash

everything you see to figure out where it actually should go. So you're kind of like dumping out uh a portion of the table and insert it back in. Right? You could be stupid and start moving things around. uh you could just move things but that's not going to work because things not may not you have to rehash decide whether it it actually should go where we want to point things. So in this case here, looking up D would be fine. Uh it would still work. E would work uh as well as as well as F, right?

Uh but then the tricky one of course what would you with B? Do you wrap B around or not? Right? Doesn't matter. Okay. So nobody does this. Don't do this. This is just way too expensive because again you you don't know how many things you're going have to rehash at the moment you do this, right? So, what you really want to do is just use tombstones and you basically maintain a little marker uh to to denote that the key that used to be here has been deleted. It's not physically removed, right? I mean,

you could zero out the the bits if you want. Doesn't matter. But the when you do a scan, the sort of the the thread's going to see that the space used to contain something, but it's not there anymore. And it knows to treat that as if it was occupied and not really a truly empty space. So, keep scanning to find the thing that you want. Right? So, I delete C. Uh, hash to A, go down here, mark a little tombstone. Now, when I do a look up on D, D lands where C used to be, sees that there's a tombstone and

says, "All right, well, I just something used to be here and it's not anymore. Let me just go ahead and keep scanning till I find the thing that I want and then I'm done." And occasionally there'll be some background thread if you wanted to go ahead and prune these up and in which case you would have to do rehashing if you wanted that. Uh or if now someone wants to insert something into the space that is occupied by a tombstone you just use it and that that's still considered

valid and correct >> what's that if I if I do what >> the question is what would happen if I query to get C. Well, it would in this case here you would see what hashes to A. So you land at A. Say this is not delete. This is a get. I would see A is not what I want. I'd keep scanning. I would see that the the tombstone spot on C is. I know that's not what I want either because it's it's considered deleted. Then I have to keep scanning down D, E, F, wrap around to B. Then I

get to that first free slot up there. It's empty at this point. I didn't see C. And I would have seen it if it was if it was uh as I did my scan. So I would say it's not found. >> Yes. somewhere else. >> The question is if I do it do an update to D or insert a new D. >> So same as what would I do if I update the value of D? Um I mean for for this we wouldn't for updates you scan the key they're looking for. If it doesn't exist, you don't update it. If you do see it, then you just could

just overwrite it and you wouldn't need to move where D is. We're not really worried about updates. We're not worried about here. It's insert, update, deletes or sorry, insert, deletes, and get and selects gets. All right. So now let's say I want to insert a new key. G hashes to where C used to be. Again, it's a tomb. The tombstone's there. It's know it. It knows that logically the space is unoccupied. So let's go ahead and put the thing we want in there. So you

wouldn't typically store the tombstone in line on the in the every slot. Typically in the it'll be like in the page header uh you would say here's all the slots and whether they're considered uh occupied or not in in a simple bit map and that ensures that all your data is aligned. Yes. >> The question is >> question is am I going to maintain a map about tombstones or what? The question is uh would I do I need to maintain a separate data structure that says for a given key it's been deleted.

This is the data structure right? >> So so the question is like would I do I need to record that this tombstone corresponds to a previous value? But like the I suppose you could do that. That would that would help prevent the problem I said before. Like if I look for C, I then have to wrap around. I I could just see the tombstone. Ah, see used to be here. That's what I'm looking for. I guess it's not here anymore, right? The problem with that one is though, you don't know whether someone else inserted

C after later on. And I and and I would miss that if I saw the tombstone immedely jumped out. We have >> I think you're saying like are we relying on information that be stored in the tombstone to help optimize certain things? I think that's what you're saying. Uh, I suppose you could. Nobody does that because it's extra complexity and this is so simple. It just makes it so fast. Like the extra checks you're talking about are just not probably not worth it, right? I might be wrong with that, but if

you're Yeah, most people don't do that because most people are still going to not support deletes anyway because they're going to use these for hash tables, right? I'm just inserting and then reading and then throwing it away. But if you want to support deletes, that's an additional oposition I think you could do, but I don't think anybody does it because it's just it's just more machinery. Okay, let me jump through uh because we're short on time because we haven't

got the dynamic stuff. But um if you want to handle non-unique keys, you basically have this you can store them either in separate link lists or you uh just store the key multiple times. That's what the most systems do. Second one, the tricky thing of course is going to be that uh if depending on the operation I'm doing, I may see you know say go give me key uh xyz. I may hash into it, land it, see key xyz. I have to keep going till I see the the first free slot in my lookup because at that point

then I know that I I'm not going to see any more xyzs, right? Same for deletes. If I if I remove all the xyz, I I have to do that. Again, most systems do that because you don't need to maintain the separate data structure up above. Just store my keys in the giant hash table, right? Uh let me skip optimizations. Um just to say like you you could have specialized hash tables based on the keys. So in in clickouts for example, they have hashts for strings, have the separate hashts for integers, they have separate hashts

for large strings, right? you have 20 different hash tables in their in their implementation which is crazy. Uh so they have amazing blog article talks about a lot of these things. All right, I'm going to talk about alternative uh to linear pro hashing um called cuckoo hashing. And this idea should be pretty simple but it's it's it's again breaking this conceived notion that like we're going to have one hash function tell me one location where I could find my uh find the key I'm

looking for. I'm actually have multiple hash functions and my key could be in multiple locations and it may change over time uh because again the open addressing allows me to do that to over time as the keys the keys that I'm inserting changes. So the lookouts and deletions are always going to be 01 guaranteed. Uh because I'm going to uh if I hash it, I'm either going to find exactly the key I'm looking for, may have to hash it multiple times, still constant factor, but again, it's not that's not free, or

I'm not going to see it at all. The inserts are going to be more expensive because I may have to take a splot somebody else, remove the key, and then insert it back in. Let's look at an example. See what I mean. So I want to put a I have a single hash fun hash table like I before a bunch of slots but in this case here I'm going to have two hash functions right it's going to be the same implementation like same rapid hash or xx hash3 just you give it a different seed so that they guarantee to produce

or not guarantee they're going to produce different hash values so I'm going to hash both of them uh the key twice both the hash functions and I'm going to end up with two different slots and I'm going to look to see which one's empty in this case here I'm completely empty I'm going to flip a coin and choose the first And that's where my key is going to go. Now I'm going to do the same thing. I'm going to hash B. Uh two different locations. The first one, the first hash

function is occupied by A. So I'm not I'm going to ignore that. Instead, I'm going to choose the the free slot that the second hash function has or points to and I'll get B. Now let's see example where I have collisions at both locations. So hashing C, the first hash function is where A is, second hash function goes where B is. Both are occupied. So, the way this is going to work is I'm going to choose a victim. I'm going to choose one of the the the slots that I'm

hashing to. I'm going to steal their location, kick them out of the house, put my [ __ ] in there, right? And then they got to go find a new place to live. It's called cuckoo hatching because there's there's a cuckoo bird. That's what they do. They go find other birds nests, kick them out, and then plant their own eggs, right? Um basically, what's that? But the question is, where did the victim entry go? Let's keep going. It's this. All right. So, we're gonna take the

first one. Uh, so C is going to kick out B. Put his stuff in there. And then now we got to put B in, right? So, with B, I'm showing for simplicity, I'm showing only hashing uh with the first hash function because back here, right, we decided to choose the the second hash function. In actuality, you don't really you're not going to record what hash function you use to to insert it because there's extra space is unneeded. You you would end up hashing it again and then see which one is occupied or which one

points you the pack the place you just got kicked out of. Right? So now we hash B again for the first hash function. It goes where A is. So same thing. It's going to take its its slot, kick A out. Now we get A back in. We're going to hash A and it's gonna land here. And that was the free slot that one of the free slots we had in the very beginning. >> How does what? How to prevent cycles? You just keep track of like, hey, is this the key I just inserted? I'm trying to that I

started off with >> statement. The list was quite long. Yes. >> In fact, no, it's not a list. You don't need a list. I don't care about how I got there. I just care what he has started with. >> A cycle. >> Uh to to his point, yeah, right. So, I don't know exactly. I don't think you need you don't need the full list though. I think you need where you started and the most recent one. Yeah. Know you can have I don't know the answer but it's going to be it's if you

have to maintain list it's unavoidable. >> Yes. >> So what they all hash >> same as delay on all hash functions the hash table was full double the size and and rebuilt it. Yep. No free lunch. You always have to do something. So now I do a lookup. I want to get B. I'm going to hash it twice. Again, I'm showing this to be in parallel because it's PowerPoint. Actual out. You hash the first one, see where that has the thing you want. If it's there, you're done.

Then h if if not, then hash the second one to see it, right? But in this case here, I would hash the the first one, look for B, and I would find it my slot there. But I could also look at look in the other one. That's why it's 01 because I'm guaranteed to either see it immediately my first sort of step into the the data structure or or it's or doesn't exist. Yes. >> Go back here. >> So, we were here. C collided. Uh, so >> yeah, sorry. We want to start C. Collided with both A and B. We got We

got to pick a victim. >> We B. Yes. C goes in there. B pops out. We got to put it back in. either of them are the same. >> So hash now. >> Yeah. >> Uh well, so the the the second hash function is where I came from. Yes. So you would do both of them when you come back out and try to go back in because it's this the the protocol is the same if you're inserting a key for the first step versus like I got invicted, I got to go back in. It's the same for PowerPoint reasons. I'm just not

showing. Yeah, but you you would do both. Yes. The question is how do you know how many hash functions to use? Yeah. So, um there's I think there's been theoretical work done on this. You can prove that like for hash table of this size of this many expected keys uh you want this number of of hash functions. And then there's a trade-off also too of like if I have a lot of hash functions then I may uh it's more work but I I can maybe not hit a cycle as quickly right I forget the the default one so the the

most the mo the best open source implementation of a coug hash table was actually from CMU from Dave Anderson they still maintain it and I think the default is like six hash functions other questions So this is a neat little trick. Uh it's a cool idea. It's slower than than a linear pro hash table because it's liner probing is so simple uh that you can rip through it quickly. So very few systems do this. All right. So in the two schemes I just showed you got to know the number of keys ahead of time. All right. Uh, and

then if we our load factor gets too much or we get stuck in a in an infinite loop in the cuckoo hashing or we run out of free slots in our linear probe hash table, we got to stop what we're doing uh reallocate space and and and uh resize it, right? So dynamic hash tables are going to have a mechanism built in that allows them to grow and shrink incrementally as needed as you as you're inserting things. So the hash table you're probably most familiar with is change hasht. Uh I think this is what uh python gives you

or java hashmap gives you right but in the data world there's two more sophisticated ones extendable hashing and and linear h uh linear hashing. And again I was saying the confusing part is I just talked about the linear probe hash table and there'll be now a linear hashing hash table and they're they're separate things. One's static one is dynamic. I I don't make up these names right I don't think control. All right. So chain hashing, right? This is what you get in Java hashmap. Uh actually

Python, I don't know if Python gives you this by default, but this is what this is what Java gives you. So you're basically going to maintain a link list of of buckets uh for for a given slot where you can insert keys. So it's kind of like a partition version of the linear probe hash table where you still have to do a sequential scan potentially to find the thing you're looking for. Um but at least now you don't have to scan the entire table. it's just scoped into the you know some some portion of the table

and you resolve collisions by just placing elements at the that collide with each other. You're going to append them to the end of this this bucket link list. Right? You define the keys you're looking for. You just you hash them some some link list and then you scan through and find the see whether the key exists or not. So now we're going to have this this separate data structure of bucket pointers and here's all our buckets, right? So I want to do a put on a I hash it mod n by

the number of bucket pointers I have. Uh and that's going to then give me a pointer now to the starting location of the bucket chain. And now I just do my linear linear scan uh linear probe to find a free first free slot. Soon as I find one, I can put the key that I want. So I'll put a there. Same thing I I I want to insert B hash hash hash hash in the bucket point array find a location and we put it there. Now we want to do put C. C ends up in the same bucket uh list or bucket chain as A, but it scans

through and sees A's occupying the first slot. Jumps down to the next one till it gets it right. And then same thing with D. D goes where A and C are. But at this point our bucket for simplicity only has two two slots. Uh so we have to make a new bucket uh and just have a pointer from that bucket to the the next one. All right. So obviously these this this bucket chain can grow infinitely. And so if I'm if I'm unlucky and my my my hash function is terrible, they're all mapping to the same uh same location,

then it's going to be again on lookup for for everything and that's be bad. But the hash function if it has low collision rate then it'll have some more randomness and things will be more evenly spread out. Same thing put E so forth goes in here put F goes down here. Right? So one little optimization you can do that some systems do is you put a little filter in the bucket point array similar to that prefix in the German strings that I just mentioned where like I can check this this filter to say hey

is the key I want did it even could it even exist in my bucket chain uh that I'm going to point to? If yes, then I do the scan. If no, then I know don't even bother doing the scan. So, typically you're gonna use something like a bloom filter. It's okay if you don't know what a bloom filter is. We'll cover that next week. But it's basically it gives you like set membership. It just tells you does this thing even exist or not. And it may give you actually a false positive. It may tell

you ex it exists when it doesn't actually exist, but it'll never give give you a false negative. And it'll never say this thing doesn't exist when it actually truly does. All right. Let me try to plow through in uh in in 13 minutes one of the two hardest data structures, but we can re we can revisit this again on Monday next week again. Um, all right. So, extendable hashing is a more sophisticated uh dynamic hashing scheme that extends or built upon the chain hashing approach I just saw before

where I want to when I want to start uh resizing the data structure, I'm going to split buckets. uh instead of just letting this link list grow forever, which I could be end up being O. When my bucket gets full, I'm going to split it and redistribute the keys inside that bucket. So at at most the bucket chain the bucket chain can't grow forever. Every now every chain can only have one bucket in it, right? But the game they're going to play is to make this all work is they're going to

allow in our uh our bucket array multiple locations in that bucket array could point to the same bucket and that's be okay. Right? So this is not widely used. Uh it's an it's an older technique. Uh it was in um it's like a new database management system. is an think of like an embedded key value store uh for that like the GNU environment provides you. It's also using asterisk DB which is a a big data system at UC Irvine from 10 years ago. Uh but I think got merged into Couchbase and Couchbase uses a lot

of these techniques now. All right. So let's let's let's see how this what this looks like. Okay. So for for every bucket there's going to be this sort of this this uh local indicator say how many how many bits we're going to do you have to use to get to that bucket and there's going to be this global bit counter thing that's going to tell me globally how many bits do I need to consider at this point in time based on the size of my hashable to find the the a particular bucket for a

given key. So basically determine that just the maximum number of of bits we have to consider in our hash. So again, the hash function is going to return like a 32-bit integer or a 64-bit integer. But the way this scheme works is at least as as you start building it up as growing and resizing things, you only need to look at a small portion of those bits at the very beginning, right? So in this case here, so the global bit counter is two. So that means that I only need to look at two bits in my hash

hash value, right? And so this global thing is going to increase anytime I'm going to start doing uh splits. I need to res resize things. But then the local bit counter, it's just sort of keeping track of like for this bucket, how many bits did I actually use to get there? But the way we're going to get into it, we we need to use the global one and and the hash bits on the and the bucket array on the side here, right? All right. So let's uh so sort of think it like this, right? for the if I for

these first two elements or first two locations in the in the bucket array I only need the first the first bit but for the other two I need to look at all two bits okay so let's first do a lookup on a right so the first thing I do is I hash A I get back now a uh you know 64 integer made of 64 bits but I look at my global counter my bit counter and it's set to two so I know I only need to look at two bits define in my hash table uh the bucket I want for have this potential key right so the first two bits are 01

so I look at my my bucket array for 01 follow whatever that pointer is and I land in that bucket that I want right that's pretty easy if I want to do a put now I'm put on B same thing hash it look at the first two bits right it's one zero that takes me to this bucket here. And because I had a free slot, I can go ahead and insert it without spilling. And that's fine. Right now, let me do a put on C. And now when I hash it, the first two bits are one zero again. And that's going to take us

to this bucket. But there's no more free slots for it inside the bucket. So now I have to overflow it. So, the way this is going to work is that I'm going to increase my global bit counter to now three. And now I'm going to create a new uh slot array here that's going to be double the size that I had before because I'm I'm now going to include an extra bit in in the addressing scheme for it. Right? So, this thing is not that big. This is not like resizing the giant hash table of

all all my keys. This is, you know, this is a small operation. This is no big deal. Right? So now I'm going to re resize it. And now I the global bit counter is three. But but I have a bunch of other uh and I have that still that that middle guy that middle bucket I need I need to split. But for the other the one at the top and one at the bottom I'm going to leave them alone because they're not being modified by by this insert, right? It's only that one in the middle. So I'm

going to go ahead and split the middle guy, right? and then go through and rehash the the the keys that are in it to decide where they where they need to go next. Right? So now in my in my uh in my bucket array, I know that I have a bunch of locations here where I only need to look at the first bit and that's going to take me to that that first location here. So bit is zero is go there. Then I have these other ones here. you need you need to look at two bits uh and that's going to take me to this

one uh the one down here um and then the for three bits those will be separated into those separate ones here right >> yes question number just how much how many times it's been >> yes question is is the number next to the bucket keeping track of how many times it's been split more or less yes >> yeah yes yes that makes >> the question is could you come up with a pathological case where this thing just grows exponentially because everything's hashing in the same location. Yes.

So like try to say this if you have a if you have a table that has a billion records and you're trying to build a hash table on one column and that one column only stores the value one. It's a billion records that all have value one. Yeah, this this this is gonna be terrible for us. Right. Don't do that. Right. >> The question is am I keeping track of like which one is is a two bucket one or what? Three bucket one. No. So you you implicitly get that. So I'm showing like you know these numbers here the 1 33 32

>> but this isn't for demonstration purpose the pointers themselves because I'm allowing uh multiple slots to point to the same thing right so because I haven't split the first bucket yet then if anything hashes to any of those slots here implicitly I know I only need to look at the first bit and that takes me to to that one and they're all pointing to the same thing. >> Yes. >> So I have two questions. First you said when we overflow we don't want to touch

one we want to split three but must we split three like can't we just redirect like one half of three into one and the other half of >> so his statement is in this case here when I want when I want to I have to overflow split two instead of splitting it you're proposing to do what to >> redirect >> uh what do you mean redirect >> like like the second array >> like like this thing this thing here. >> Yeah. Like well okay the first one the top the first array number three then

>> yes >> can't we just merge it with number one for example and not any >> I say is can't you just merge statement is could you just take the I see take the second from the top merge it back into one no because the the hash value to get into that second one >> you would still change the left hand part you would still like have more bits now that you look It's just Yeah, I just say um I'd have to think about whether it's correct. You could do it, but like

you >> So, so this goes back to what I was saying before. It isn't like an algorithms class where you assume everything's in memory. That top page, right? Like the one with the one on it, that may be out on disk. So to do what you're proposing, I got to go uh create the still create the new page, right? So there's one allocate there. Then I got to go read that other page, bring it back in and do a right to it again. It's just that extra machinery is not worth it. >> My second question was to look at the

least bit more random. >> See, is don't you want to look at least submit bits? Wouldn't that be more random? Um depends depends on the hash function. Okay. It means hashed, right? to the hashes hash is supposed to generate a u >> so those are the results of the hash function >> yes yeah it's it's random so his statement is and he's correct like when we talk about bit packing memory he said like oh like you sort of think as a 32 bit integer but most of the most of the

front of the bits are going to be zero and therefore that's sort of wasteful you're basically with a hash function you're taking you're generating random integers for for arbitrary keys so the the string A and the string B those are pretty close to each other if you just look at the bit sequence but if I take a good hash function they need completely different hash values therefore the bit sequences are be completely random so I'm just showing you whatever the the most significant

ones here okay so all right let me get through this last one linear hashing um and then we'll switch over to the to the the guest speaker so the same that is the that we want to be able to resize our hash table without having to rehash everything. Um, this is going to be slightly different now where we're going to allow uh we're going to trigger a resizing when a when a um is this when a a a bucket overflows, but the bucket we're not going to split is not is is not potentially not be the one that

overflowed. In extendable hashing, the one that overflowed, that's the one I split. In linear hashing, it may not be the one. We'll see why in a second. So the this is actually what Postgress uses. I think they called it the the Dina hash table or dynamic hash table something like that. Uh the code that was written in this was written by uh one Mike Stoneberger the inventor of Postgress students back in Berkeley in uh early 90s late late 1980s. She then went off and re-implemented a linear

hash table in uh in this thing called Berkeley DB that Oracle bought in 200 uh 2006. Um and then this is actually an internal data structure that Dynamo DB uses as well. All right. So just like before we have we have bucket pointers and they're going to point to to buckets. But now I have this this extra thing called the split pointer. And that's basically just be pointing to some uh to some some bucket that's going to be the next bucket I'm going to split whenever any bucket in my hash table overflows.

So at the very beginning I'm always going to have uh a uh powers of two number of buckets. In this case here it'll be four. And I'll have a hash function that the I could have multiple hash functions that I'm going to use to decide where in my uh bucket pointer I want to jump into based on the location of the split pointer. Does it make more sec make more sense in a second? So I want to say I want to get six. I take six I hash it. Say we're just doing identity hash so it's the

same value. Uh and I'm going to mod it by the number of buckets that I have. stays four and I end up getting two. And so when I do my look at my bucket array, I would see that the that bucket is below the where the split pointer is pointing at. So I know I I only need one hash function to find the thing that I'm looking for. So then I just jump along do end in a bucket do linear scan to find the thing that I want. Now let's say I want to do a put on 17. I I mod it by four. I get one. Now I I I I when I

land in this location here using the single hash function, I see that the bucket is full. So now I got to do a uh an I have to build an add an extra bucket to my chain and keep track that I overflowed. So that means I got to split something. But the thing I'm going to split isn't the thing that just overflowed. I'm going to split whatever the split point is pointing at. In this case here, it's pointing to the top top uh the top bucket bucket zero. So, I'm going to go ahead and split this guy. Even though it

has a free slot, and it could absorb another insert, I'm still going to split it, right? So now to do this, I'm going to add an extra entry into my bucket pointer array. So now be there'll be slot four. But now I can't address that if I do mod n what it was before, which is uh when I had four, right? Now I'm going to mod it by 2n, whatever I had before. So even though I haven't added any entries into my bucket pointer beyond just this fourth one here, uh I know I'm going to keep growing. So I I

may I have to add new entries as my split pointer moves down. So in this case here, I I have my new hash function. Now I got to go figure out where to go put all of the uh the keys that exist in in the first first bucket that I split. So I take key eight, mount it by now two n. So this going to get by by eight. So 8 mod 8 is zero. So that's going to stay where it started. But then 20 mod 8 is four. So that's going to now point to this one down here. Right? So I got to move 20 down here.

And I move the split pointer down by one. Now I do a look up on 20. First I'm gonna do is take the first hash function, right? So take take whatever the value is mod by n. And that's going to land me in uh in a in location zero because that again that's where it was before with the first hash function. But here now I check to see is the location with the first hash function above the split pointer. If yes then I know that the bucket has had been split. So therefore, I have to hash it again using

the second hash function to find where its current real location actually is because I don't know after I do the first hash function whether it remained at the top or got moved down to the one at the bottom. In this case, K20 got moved to the bottom. You're shaking your head. No, as if this is terrible. This is not the one. >> Yes. >> So, yeah. So, this sounds crazy. Like, why would you do this? The idea is that eventually if I overflow again then I'll split the one that that I built the

chain on. So eventually it all evens out and you can sort with a balanced data structure. >> Yes. >> By two and yes so yeah >> whenever you split something else. I last question. Sorry. >> A question. The question is how would you ever get out of bounds? Like the array actually exists. You just you just haven't allocated buckets for the things below it yet. Yeah. All right. Sorry. We can come back to this on class next week. Uh just we'll pick up on on again. Let's switch over to uh Caric.

All right. This is Cararthik. He's the co-founder of uh Gigabyte. It's been 10 years, right? >> It's about It's getting there. Almost 10 years. Nine and a half. Yes. It takes 10 years to build a database. So, >> which is finding it is right >> which is insane. All right. Floor is yours. Thank you for being here. >> Uh so folks that are not um familiar with Yugabyte DB, we uh convert Postgress SQL. We it's a new database. We've taken Postgress as the source code

and we made it a distributed database and uh you know we're fully open source under Apache 2.0 And you know we've had quite a few uh like you know members in the community contributing a lot of deployments etc etc and we are a distributed cloudnative version of postpress right uh these are some of the things we focus on distributed transactions multi-API cloudnative and getting you know supporting AI workloads we look at a few of these things right so what are we really as I said distributed fully postgress compatible

database we're built for business critical applications right and u we focus on bringing resilience scalability and geo distribution or multi-reion deployments to Postgress. Uh and this helps people build modern applications. You can think of multi-reion, genai, edge, these type of applications or to modernize their existing applications that are high value but want to come into the cloudnative world. Um our thesis why like it's always important to ask yourselves if you know why a database exists. We ask ourselves

that and what is the differentiation. So if you think of y-axis as how Postgress compatible a database is and the x-axis as truly how cloudnative a database is uh we were born to be at the intersection of those two. There's a line on the yaxis after which you're reusing Postgress code and those databases continue to benefit from Postgress and inherit most of the Postgress innovations. There's a line on the x-axis, the cloudnative uh database innovation threshold to the right of which you can truly go and build

cloudnative systems, right? To put names to faces, this is our thesis of the market. You can test it out yourself. You obviously shouldn't trust me. I'm a founder, so you should trust only so far as it goes and extend your own uh you know ideas to this. But anyways, uh the ones above the PG innovation threshold reuse Postgress code, therefore can build along with the Postgress innovation. Otherwise, you're building to it. Um, and those to the right of the cloudnative innovation threshold are

architected from the ground up to be shared nothing, cloudnative, highly resilient and available, right? And so we were born after most of these databases. So hopefully we got something right which was to hybridize the best of those two into a single product. Okay, these are again our areas of innovation. Uh, you know, Postgress, distributed, enterprisegrade AI, right? We have a lot of customers. Won't bore you with this. Um I' I'd like to talk about one just one customer here NPCI uh

which is the National Payment Corporation of India. So all mobile payments in India are going through a Yogabyte database. Very proud of the achievement as a product as a company. Um but anyways just something to show that you know the level to which it waxes and waines the level to which you need resilience. It is truly uh the case there that resilience availability uptime and scalability equals money right in this example. Um okay so with that let's jump right into uh some of the design principles we wanted to build

everything in Postgress no questions asked. So all the Postgress isolation levels the Postgress transactional semantics all of the advanced features and extensions and the ability to do rolling upgrades and downgrades across major Postgress versions. Uh that last one was really hard. It's not something that like as far as I know anyone else really does and it's something that you know we're pretty proud of having implemented. It took a lot of work to to really like you know to bring it to

fruition. Uh anyway so these are some of the Postgress features that we support like on the right like all the way to stored procedures and triggers and everything right. So we pretty much our goal is to support everything. Um we also go beyond Postgress we address some of its architectural limitations. there are architectural limitations when it comes to the core database uh features when it comes to scalability your resilience availability DR disaster recovery and multi-reion deployments and security so these are some of the areas

that we go ahead and look at in in more detail as it relates to modern applications right and um the same thing when you look at it when you flip the coin and look at it like things like connection pooling and observability and perf tuning when folks come from other systems or build services today like lambda systems they expect a lot of these things right so these are the things we're putting into postgress at an architectural level so uh and I'll be I'm breezing through this section

because we can get to the really like you need to know the layout of what we're building in order to talk about some of the details right uh the other piece that we did and this was a foundational thesis like as a way of a quick background I used to work at meta before and at meta what we learned and what we felt was building cloudnative applications is not about SQL and NoSQL. It's about relaxing constraints and driving value by going faster in certain types of scenarios. So it's not SQL or

NoSQL. It is about how can you operationalize and get those workloads that are being built to really run well in the cloud or in cloudnative infrastructure. Right? So to that effect, we started with two APIs on top because everybody we spoke to said don't build another goddamn database. So when we really looked into it, we we figured out they meant what they meant to say was don't build a new API. No one understands what a new API will do. However, existing databases like Postgress, like um like you know like

say Oracle, [ __ ] all of these things, you have an intuition as to when to pick them. Uh and so that's how the industry operates. So you know we started out with two um one was Apache Cassandra based and the other is obviously Postgress and now the document DB folks at Azure are building a [ __ ] API um like uh on top of Postgress so this is something we inherit and we can obviously being a scalable and resilient version of Postgress that's pretty exciting there's uh Oracle as well that

we're working with some folks on and and the industry in general is building more and more of these emulation layers uh presumably because GI is making it faster to go in that direction. Right? So this is something that we're just seeing as a trend. Okay. So let's take a look at the architecture at a glance. Um at the highest level we wanted to achieve Postgress functionality, right? So the way we did this was we took the left and moved it to the right. Left is a very very high level view of what Postgress

is. Uh think of the query processing engine of Postgress as the green box and the storage components as the blue box below. So we retained the green box, right, and made it stateless and to be able to run on any node and replaced the blue box with our own storage layer, which is a distributed transactional storage layer, right? So that means you're now the blue the the blue box now is distributed and replicated and it gives the information to the green boxes above in the way that Postgress expects

it as a tupil. So green box just does its thing and fires off queries. the the the storage layer does its um you know all of the the filtering fetching all of that stuff and presents the data in the way the green boxes would have had them in the left right like the the postgris query processing engine obviously if you do this you get into uh it works but the problem is it doesn't work very well from a performance standpoint because you're now reading all the data up to a single node and then doing a bunch of

processing there so that doesn't work really well so the next step immediately that comes up is to start doing these pushouts, how can you push more and more operations to where the data is? How can you be smarter about how little data you can transfer between these uh nodes, right? That becomes the name of the game. And so that's something that we focused on quite a bit. And and I'd say all of these things are still going on because Postgress is improving and we're we're still bringing more of the

Postgress features into Yugabyte. So these are all like a continuum, right? This is the way it continues to work. And u another aspect that we look at is how can we match the performance of Postgress and you know this is where it gets into really interesting stuff. Uh Yugabyte DB is a log structured uh storage engine and uh Postgress uses a B tree format to write into disk. Um I hope folks are familiar if not like you know maybe ask Andy he'll tell you at in a different class but uh uh log structured is really good for SSDs and

uh it has a lot of good properties. However, the Postgress costbased optimizer and its performance is tied at the hip to the way it stores data on disk. Right? So this is something that we've been looking at and this is almost a two-year journey for us where think of this as the different um access patterns that Postgress exposes and we started out at a pretty low number and you know we're working our way to a pretty pretty high number right in terms of what we're able to support uh the number of uh

comparable operations we're able to support with respect to Postgress as well as the costbased optimizer. In this case Postgress works on a single node. So the way it sets up a query plan and the way it executes any simple query that a any query that a user does is often optimized for a single node and we are a distributed database which goes after a distributed plan. However, a lot of our users complain that look this was a simple query that was just a couple of gigabytes on Postgress. It would run on

my laptop. It doesn't really work. It's like a 100 times worse on Yugabyte. Well, the problem is we sharted it and moved it all over the different nodes. And if you're f fetching a thousand rows and you're returning one, fetching a thousand rows from local disk, you know, your order of access is in the microsconds. So thousands or thousand rows would be in the order of milliseconds and you filter it down to one row and you return it. Great. Fetching a thousand rows over the network is in the order of milliseconds.

So that would be in the order of hundreds of milliseconds to a second. So your performance sucks, but no use telling the user that cuz they're thinking it's just a thousand rows. How bad can it be? Right? So we had to do an adaptive thing where we're able to match Postgress at the lower you know ends of scale when scale isn't big with while providing resilience but be able to adapt to how to automatically shard and scale right and we had to build a whole framework for it to estimate what

percentage of the time we picked the best plan versus Postgress and we use the taco uh framework like there's a there's a academic paper on it we use that paper to build a framework to then go test it and so this is one of the parts of our testing suite Okay, Postgress is a single node and if you put two nodes of Postgress, people will tell you why don't you deploy PG bouncer. Simple, right? >> We're kind of short of time. You have like a last slide or something you want to show.

>> Yeah. So, um, so I wanted to say connection manager, building it in um, sharding vector indexes and attaching it to the data. These are some of the topics that we work on. Looking forward, we're looking at a whole bunch of uh, you know, future things like, you know, putting in BM25, other types of indexes, so on and so forth. A whole bunch of stuff. I had something interesting that maybe if you had five minutes, Andy, I'll share. If not, it's okay. It was about a few interesting architectural

war stories. I just have three, four of them, but if it's interesting, I'll show it. Otherwise, I'll skip. >> I mean, it's interesting to me. We're out of time. The students have other classes. They got to run through. So, got it. Got it. Okay. No worries. We'll do that another time. Yeah. >> Any questions for Karthik? And again that we posted on on Piaza for their interest and things like that. They're two of my best students master student undergrad are are currently at

uh at Yugabyte. I had some of my best students do internship there and they've all been very happy. Okay. All right. Give a round of applause. Thank you, man. Thank you so much for being here. All right. Have a good weekend. Remember homework 2 is due on Sunday. That's when clips acquat [Music] the fortune [ __ ] maintain flow with the brain. [Music]

