[music] [music] I'm still ass. [music] [music] Uh, round of applause for DJ Cash. again. Thank you for being here. Um, a lot to cover today. >> Have you heard from your your friend Fat Fat Face Trick? >> Yeah, he's doing good. >> He's doing better. Okay. >> He picked up a charge, though. >> He picked up a charge in London. >> Yeah, he did. >> For what? >> I can't tell you that. >> Oh, man. All right. Well, that's that's

his problem. Uh, we can't It's in London. We can't help him here. All right. So, let's jump into databases because that's that's the most important thing in life. Um, so again, this is just a reminder for everything for you guys is due. Project one is due coming up. Uh, homework three will be out today and that'll be due in um in a few weeks. And then midterm again, midterm exam again will be uh in class on October 8th and it'll cover lectures zero zero lecture one to lecture 11. Okay. And

then we'll we'll post the uh the study guide this weekend early or like Monday next week. Okay. Any questions about any of this? Again, we have the special office hours this Saturday at 3 PM in Gates on 527. That's one of the the the lab rooms. Again, there'll be multiple TAs there. We'll use OQ to queue yourself up and come come and ask questions. Okay. All right. So, let's continue on our discussion on our journey about uh indexes and and the data structures we're going to use to build these things

inside of our system. Um today's class we want to talk about indexes and filters. We sort of mentioned filters briefly early in the semester. Um when mentioned bloom filters, we haven't described what they are yet. Um but I just want to highlight the distinction between what a filter is and what an index is. And we're going to need both and sometimes you'll put a filter in your in your index to help sort of speed speed up certain operations. So an index is going to be a data structure like a

hash table or a B+ tree or the things we talked about so far that we're going to use as a way to find uh find in records that we want or or sets of records that we want based on some attribute within the table like a column in the table. We want to do a be do a quick lookup to find you know all the users or all the people with you know cs.cmu.edu edu email address, right? We can use an index to go go find that, right? So, it'll give us for some key, it'll give us a an exact location of where we can

go find the data we want or at least a starting point for the the data that we want. A filter is going to be a uh it's going to be like an index, but instead of being able to tell us does this thing exist and where does it exist in in our tables, a filter is going to be able to tell us just set membership. Does this thing exist? Yes or no? And it can't tell you where it is. It's just going to tell you that that it does exist. Right now, the tricky thing is going to be when we look at bloom filters, these

these will be what are called probabilistic data structures where it will tell you that it's likely that the key you're looking for exists, but it may actually give you a false positive. It may tell you actually it exists when it actually doesn't. It'll guarantee no false negatives. So, if it says it doesn't exist, it definitely does not exist. But it may give you false positives and we'll see what that looks like. So I'm going to quickly describe what a bloom filter is. Uh and then

we'll see how we can tack this on to other data structures we've been going through. Okay. So today we got we want to sort of do a smorgasborg of a bunch of other data structures we're going to want to use in our data system. Okay. We'll start off with bloom filters. Uh and then we'll jump to skip list tries inverted indexes and vector indexes. Quick show of hands. Who here has heard of a know what a bloom filter is? Less than 10%. Who here knows what a skip list is? Oh about the same. What about

tries and radex trees? Yep. Okay. Inverted indexes. Few. And then vector indexes. I'm assuming maybe HNSW, IV, FF flat. Nobody. Perfect. All right. So, we'll see as we go along in today's lecture as well that we're going to use some of these earlier data structures we'll describe as building blocks to make more complicated things or we'll apply some of the ideas we've used in other parts of the database system and they'll we'll we'll we can we can use them to enhance

these different data structures. All right. So, let's start off with bloom filters. These are super useful, super common um that pretty much use in almost every every single database system and it's a probabistic data structure where it's going to be able to tell you whether again whether a key exists in your set or whether it does not exist, right? And we mean pro the term probabilistic means that like there'll be some bit of randomness to it where it could tell you something exists even

though it doesn't. But it's guaranteed to never tell you something exists that something that does not exist when it actually does. So it'll give you false positives with some some and you can tune it based on you know how what the false positive rate you want it to be depending on the size and the number of hash functions you're going to use. But again you you'll never get false negatives. So Bloom Filter is only going to be able to give you basically two operations. The API only has two things.

You can insert a key and you can do a lookup a key. You can't delete a key. We'll see how to handle that in a second with other other data structures. Uh but you can only do lookups and you can only do uh uh uh inserts. And basically the way it's going to work is that there's going to be this bit map or bit vector like a thing one hot encoding that we're going to use to keep track of whether a key hashes some location in the bit map. And we can use multiple hash functions to land at different locations to ensure

that uh you to change the false positive rate or change the the accuracy of the data structure. So this is going to be widely used for like inmemory caches. We want to use this when we do joins. Uh we can also put these things in our hash tables, put these things in in our busties. We can use these things to everywhere because they're they're really compound. So here's a basic bloom filter that has eight bits, right? And initially when I first init start the data structure they're all set to zero. All right. So

say I'm going to insert a key. I want to insert the riza. So for this bloom filter I have eight bits. I'm going to use two hash functions. Right? You can you can calibrate how many hash functions you want. You can calibrate how what size you want the bit map you want to be. Make this work in PowerPoint. I'm doing two two functions with eight bits. So what I'm going to do is I'm going to hash it uh these two hash functions. And again it'll be the same algorithm the same hash function

algorithm like murmur hash city hash whatever you want. just I give it a different seed so that it permutes it in a different way for for each invocation. So let's say that I get now two different hash values 222 44 44 44 44 44 44 44 44 44 44 44 and I'm going to modify the number of bits I have in my my bit my uh bloom filter bit bit vector I get six and four. So now I'm just going to jump into those different offsets and set those bits to one. Right? That's pretty cheap. That's fast

to do. Let me insert the jiza. All right, same thing. hash it twice, modify the number of of of locations or spots I have in my my bit map, and then that's going to point me to now uh two different locations. I set those bits to one. So now I want to do a look up on Rizza, do the same thing. We're going to hash it again, and I'm going to get those same bit locations and then as long as whatever I'm pointing at, if long as all the bits are set to one, then I know the key is is, you know, I'm going to say

the key exists, right? And this is why we can't have false negatives, right? Because if one of those bits were zero, then I would have never been able to insert Rizza because when I hash it and put it in there, I set them to one, right? So this will always return true and it'll be this case here. It's correct. If I do look up on Raycon the chef, right? Same thing. I hash it twice. Now I get five and three, right? One of those bits is set to zero. So I know that this key was not inserted. So

I set it to false. Now I I look up ODB. Rest in peace. Same thing. Hash it twice. Get two different locations. I didn't insert ODB, but my two hash locations that I land on are both set to one. So in this case here, I'm going to say true. Right? And this is example of the false positive. Right? Both locations are set to one that I'm looking up on, but I know I didn't insert this key. So now you can see why if I have more hash functions I can be have a higher guarantee of of this thing

producing a you know a correct answer but now if I have a really small bit map then if I have a lot of hash functions then like I may just be setting them all to one and then it's basically basically useless. So there's a bit of a balance on how much you want to, you know, the size and the how much compute you want to do, right? We're talking maybe, you know, kilobytes. These things aren't that big relative to the size of of large data sets, right? You guys did the countman sketch.

That's another example for project zero. That's another example of our publicistic data structure where in exchange for not having to store you know giant list of all the possible keys I could have uh to keep count of everything I I I allow myself to have some some wrong answers with some you know some guarantee of that probability pretty straightforward right and there's a bunch optimizations you can do to make these things real fast really efficient uh for this class again we're not worried about cash line stuff

and the CPU we can ignore that you understand the basic data infrastructure, you know, it's it's pretty small. It's pretty compact. It's pretty fast to do this lookup, right? Much faster than doing a probe and a hash table if you have to scan through because now I'm comparing hashes and comparing keys as I go along. So, when we talk about uh doing um hash joins in a few weeks, some systems will put a build a bloom filter in front of the hash table. So, you probe the bloom filter first. If it comes back as

negative, then you know it can't be in your hash table. So, you don't probe the hash table. this comes back as positive then you get go probe the hash table to see whether it actually exists right sometimes it's called a bloom join a bloom hash join the basic idea we again this is a useful data structure we can use in a bunch of different locations other filters we may want to consider also is a counting bloom filter uh for this one you basically have multiple levels of uh of of bit maps and this

allows you then to also then do deletes um you sort of sort of stage things out right instead of sorting single bits uh I can store actually the count right so I know if I decrement the count to to zero I know I've I've removed something but I still have that guarantee where I can have false positives but not false negatives yes >> so you question is how do you update a bloom filter if you delete a key you can't >> you can't right because again if I delete uh going back here if I delete um

who hashed am I a hash to what three right or four if I so if I or six take the six and then one of these guys hash to it right or maybe I didn't see that but anyway if I delete one of these these hashes or one one of these bits uh for one key then I don't know what are the keys I have in here because it does have bits so I made up end of removing a key or removing a bit from a key that should be in there and now I'm going to get false negatives >> false question is uh that the false positive

rate will increase when sorry >> don't delete you don't delete keys with ease >> you just don't the way you want to delete keys you want to use a counting bloom filter where instead of sorting a bit you sort of count and that that solves that problem uh there's another uh version of this called coug filter uh and the basic idea is like in it's kind of like the cougar hash table but instead of storing the entire key you just store a a a small representation called a fingerprint of

of the uh of of of the key and then that guarantees that if I remove it I the fingerprints gets removed and I'm I still have the guarantee that I can have false positives but not false negatives and the last one is a called a sync ring filter. We'll see this in a second when we talk about tries, but this is basically a compact version of a radix tree where not only can I do um a set membership queries, but also I can do range membership queries like does this key exist within some range of values

whereas all these other ones cannot do that. So the bottom two here were then here at CMU. Cuku filter is was created by Dave Anderson and his students uh in computer science department and then the sync range filter or surf that was also created by uh a student that I coded with Dave Anderson who's now a faculty at Shing Wua. Um and that again it's another cool data structure and actually in in Reddus you can actually explicitly ask for a cougar filter and they have their own like built-in type for this

again gives you that same probabil the same guarantees uh you want for actually a value you can store. Uh the question is what's the difference between a counting movement and accountman sketch? Countman sketch is giving you uh approximate cardality like for a given key how many how many times have I seen it? Counting move just says like does this key exist but then if I do multiple keys I can I can delete it. Counting move won't handle deletes. Won't tell you the exact number of times

you've seen a key. uh [groaning] statement is you can do same thing countman sketch um I mean count sketch again it's meant to track cardality this is just trying to say like does the key exist >> calman sketch can do more than this than accounting bloom filter okay all right so that so bloom filters again that's the most important filter you need to know about it's used everywhere where these other ones I just talked about, they're um they're used, but they're not not as common as bloom

filters because they're not as fast as a bloom filter, right? All right. So last class when we talked about the B+ stream, switching over now to index data structures, we talked about how the leaf nodes are essentially a sorted link list and then all the the the the inner nodes and the root nodes above it with those uh guidepost keys, the scrimmage node keys, they're b they're basically allowing you to jump into the the link list to find the data which you want more quickly. Right? So

if now we want to do uh you know if we just use a link list we end up with O searches on average case right because any single time we have to look for something we may have to scan the entire entire link list to find the thing we want okay we're not even talking about how to maintain it but it's it's the bas basically the same right so a simple link list would be sort of like this right just key followed by a pointer to the next key right and so if you want to make this go faster Uh, we can do what the B+ tree did was

as things get inserted, right? You start keeping track of the guideposts as you go down to figure out when you go left and right to to narrow down where you want to jump. But a really more sort of simple more simple approach would be let's just have every other key uh also maintain a pointer that allows us to jump over the next key or jump over by one. So if we land on key one, if you want if we know we got to get to uh some later point, we can just follow the key follow the pointer at the top to jump

over key2 to get to key3 and so forth. Right? And we keep doing this to now also then jump over uh larger segments. Right? So this again this this is going to smell a lot like the the B+ tree what we're doing here but instead of having the the keys being sort of added incrementally and then building things out um in a skip list we're basically going to flip a coin and decide when do we want to have these little sort of skip pointers right so you can think of a skip list is just a it's a multi-level link list

where you just add these extra pointers allowed you to skip over nodes to jump to farther locations into the uh into the the list. The way it works is it's a probabilistic data structure in that the not that you you'll get false negatives or false positives but more like the the the construction of the data structure is based on some some randomness. So the way you think about it is like at the the bottom level of the list, we're going to have all the keys. And then in the next level above it, we're going to

have uh about half the keys as the one below it. And then at the next level that I'll have half the keys below that. And so now when we insert something, we're we're basically going to flip a coin and decide for any key we're inserting what levels do we need to keep those skip pointers for? And so you'll get approximate login, right? Whereas in the B+ tree, if it was balanced, it guarantees to be login. In this case here, on average, it's approximately login and it usually works

out to be just fine. So the skip lists are from the 1990s. B+ trees are fun from 1970s. Uh if you squint at them, they're basically look look the same. We'll see in a second. Um but these are typically used for inmemory data structures, inmemory indexes. Remember we talked about the mem table or log structure merge trees. There was like this inmemory piece, right? Okay, often times a lot of systems that's going to be using a skip list. There are very few systems that I'm aware of use skip list for for on disk

just because it's the there's a lot more movement than you would have than a B+ tree for for moving things around in the back. Yes. >> Question is it only three levels? No, you can go you flip the coin and keep adding. Um, all right. So, here's a basic one. Again, I'm showing three levels, but it doesn't have to be. Um, so all right. So, say we've already inserted a bunch of keys. And again, I flip coins to decide how we want to put these. So, on the on your right or left side, we have

all the levels. These are the entry points into the the data structure. And then on the right side, these have these markers to say this is the end of the link list. Right? So, if I see this, then I then I know I've I've gone too far or the thing I'm looking for doesn't exist. So the probability that a key is going to exist at any level will be the number of keys that I have divided by you know uh 2n from one or divide by 2 n from the one below me right so at the first level the probability that keys exist is going

to be one because it's all the keys at the next level it'll be uh n over two n over four and then so forth going up right skipping this right so when I want to uh insert a level or certain key I'm basically going to flip a coin uh and at starting at the sort of the lowest level I'll flip a coin and if it's equals to true then I know I want to I'll assert the key there. So the very beginning again the the since you have to always put the key at the bottom because that's the final location where

every key has to exist. So this this one you don't flip a coin. You know you're always going to insert it, right? But then at the next level I say, "All right, I'll flip a coin." Uh, and if it's true or heads, whatever, then I know I want to insert this and I go to the next one. If it's false, then I don't insert an entry at this level and I'm done. So this case here, I flip a coin at this the second level, it's true. So I know I want to insert a coin or insert the key. then flip the ne go

to the next level flip a coin it equals uh true that I don't I want to start it again I could go that above that and decide okay now now it's equal to false so I don't want to put an entry in here right so for this key here we're going to put something in here so we know it has to go in this location so the way it's going to work is I'm going to first insert the [clears throat] keys where I want them to be but without connecting the rest of the data structure to them right so

simplicity assume it's in memory, right? So, I'm going to I'm going to create these the the key value records for these guys. So, the ones the ones at the top, the values are just going to be pointers to the the next level below me, right? In in skipless parlance, they they would call these towers, right? So, at the at the root level, I have the value. At the upper levels, uh I'll have pointers to the the the level below me in my tower going down. Right? Okay. So then now I need to

connect this to the rest of the of the data structure. Right? So I'm going to have pointers coming out to whatever the next one the the the next location should be in the in my data structure. Right? In this case here the bottom one key five should go go before key six. So it's going to point to key six. But key five at the other levels there isn't another key after that. So they're just going to point to the the end markers which is just infinity. And then now starting at the bottom

uh I'm gonna then rec connect it into the d the rest of the data structure by changing this pointer here now to point to my my new key. And at this point the key is safely now in the data structure. So even if if nobody follows those guideposts up above, I'll still be able to find the key that that this key here. But I'm going to then then add those keys at the top at the levels because then again they're guidepost to help me find find what I want. So then I do the same thing. Go to the next level. Change

that pointer now point to me. Go to the next level. I change that pointer now to point to me. Right? And now my key is is fully integrated with all the well all the towers. So now if I want to do a lookup, I want to find key three. So I start at the very top and I'm going to look ahead to the to on the on the pointer to what the key is is pointing at in this top level. In this case here, it's five. But because we know that three is less than five, I don't want to follow this pointer. I want to go down a level

because this is basically saying key five is that the any value that comes after this where key five is located at the top level is going to be greater than equal to five. So if I'm looking for three, which is less than five, then I know I don't want to go to the to the right of it. I got to go before it. So then I go down to the next level, do the same thing. I compare key3 with key2. key3 is greater than two or three is greater than two. So I know I want to follow this pointer to jump to this

location. Then do the same thing. Check check check the next uh the next node along this this level. Key3 is less than the key4. So I know the thing that I want has to be uh down and to the right of me rather than going across to key4. So then I move down here then just then scan along the leaf nodes as I would and any link list and then I'll find the thing that I want in the back. Yes. Yes. >> Yeah. The question is going back here are on these on these levels here. It's it's basically like like the bucket

array just tells me where to jump into. So I know how to jump to the starting point at each level. Yeah. Yes. >> Yeah. So I'm not showing the lines going down. You would have them as well. Okay, so let's quickly talk how to handle deletes. Um, so again, without talking about multi- threading stuff yet, that'll be next week. Um, the the way it basically works is that every key is going to have a little marker to say, is this thing deleted? Yes or no? And then without me having to go physically remove it

because that's actually expensive operation because I got to go remove the towers. I got to go change a bunch of pointers. So I'll have sort of the the thread that wants to delete the key just first mark this thing as being deleted and then like compaction and log structure merge trees there'll be a separate background worker background process that comes along and cleans things up at at a at a regular interval. So again along all the leaf nodes again I'm going to have this this bite value

or boolean that says is this thing deleted yes or no. So if I want to go ahead now and delete key five I'll do that traversal as I did before. I would run along the the to the the top level, see that I have key five, and then go down and then uh set it to delete it as true. So now again, any other thread that comes along and wants to do a lookup on key five, they may see this leaf node here or this bottom node in the link list that it's been, you know, it would find an actual key, but then it would

check the bit and see that it's been marked as deleted. So not to just ignore it. So now I want to go clean up the tower. Basically, I'm going to do this in reverse where I'm going to want to change the pointer at the top uh first and then work my way way down. Right? When we inserted it, we we we changed the pointers at the bottom and then worked our way up to it. This this is the opposite. So again, I'll go over to the first the starting point at the levels change that pointer now instead

of pointing to K5 uh have it point to the end. And at this point here, anybody comes along after me won't be able to see K5. Same thing, go to the next level, flip that pointer. Then once I have that, change that point at the bottom at this point here. Again, assuming I'm single threaded, right, for simplicity reasons, I know that there isn't another another thread, you know, hanging out here, uh, and wants to follow something that that goes in nowhere. If I, you know, there's some guarantees I can provide, make sure

that nobody's actually reading this, then it's it's safe for me to go ahead and delete it. And I completely remove the the key from from the data structure. So I mean skip lists are kind of cool. It's a it's a nifty little thing, right? It again if you just sort of think of it sort of being rotated, it's like a a B+ tree, but I have instead of these guideposts being determined b on how I'm doing splits and merges, it's flipping a coin decide where things are and again

there's no free lunch, it's still going to be a login. So the other thing I also point out to is in my example here I showed a one direction linked list whereas in the B+ we could we said we could have simply pointers going in both directions. So this if you want to have pointers go direction it kind of complicates things uh it complicates the the some of the operations to make things thread safe. If you have a single thread in it no big deal. Multi-threads makes a problem because you could have one guy coming

one guy one way another guy coming the other way and you'll be able to handle that. Unlike B+ trees, skip list don't require any rebalancing or splits or merges because it's just removing towers. And when you remove a tower, uh when you delete a key or if I insert a key, I'm adding new towers. It doesn't change or the the location or doesn't change the the layout of the rest of the keys in the data structure. But again, I'm showing this on PowerPoint. If it's in memory, no big

deal. You could you could pack multiple keys in in a in a chunk of memory. But if now if I am tab back by dis pages then you end up may do you end up doing more IO than you would in in a B+ stream right so again you typically see these only for inmemory data structure so the single store people I talked about a few weeks ago they were all in on the skip list and that's the main data structure they use for the row store uh in some log structure merries like Rox DB the the mem table is going to be a skip list

I think wire tiger for log retrie list. So they for inmemory stuff it's often a really easy thing to implement and a lot of systems choose to do that. Okay. So now another thing to point out also too with with B+ trees is that the the inner nodes are being used as again guidepost to tell us how to get to the bottom. But remember last class we talked about we said that may end up may ending I may end up deleting a key well it'll get removed from the the leaf nodes but then I may keep it around as one of the guidepost

because it's a good discriminator and I don't want to rebalance things right because I I don't need to and so if I'm traversing down the the B+ tree and I see a key in an inner node I can't be guaranteed that the key actually exists because I always got to get to to the leaf node right and so what'll happen is I always have to be able to traverse to the bottom of the tree in order to tell you whether a key exists or not in in in a B+ tree. In the case of the B epsilon tree we

talked at the end of last class, if I'm lucky and I land on the first node, I look in its mod log and I see the key I want has been deleted, I don't have to reverse the rest of the way. But again, for large key spaces, there's no guarantee to do that. So an alternative to doing a sort of tree search or a B+ tree or in a skip list as well uh is to do what's called a try. And the basic idea here is that instead of storing uh at every sort of level in the tree an entire key, I'm going to

store a portion of the key or a digit of it. And then so now as I'm traversing the key, as I'm traversing the tree, the path I'm taking down to the tree is actually can be used to then reconstruct the key that that I'm looking for. So if if I'm looking for a particular key and I don't see it in the first node, I don't see the first maybe the first character, first bit that I want in the first node, then I know it can't exist in the rest of the tree and I can stop right away.

So tries are older. Tries are from like the late 1950s. uh was invented by some French guy. Um again streets are 1970s tribes are like 1959 58. Uh the term try was actually invented by somebody here at CMU. I think he died last year. Um but he he coined the term in in the 60s. Yes. >> What one of the keys is >> question is what if one of the keys is a sub of another key? >> Yes. >> Yes. How would you resolve that? >> You would you just add it? >> No, but what would that look like?

>> Oh, his question is how would you resolve it? Uh well, we'll go through examples, but like uh you have h a t and you would add and then poin just coming out. Um oh, how to resolve like where something is a subset of another key. You would have both. >> Oh, like how there's h to a h >> a t and then t to e. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, so keys he's basically asking like how do I handle the case where a key is a subset of another key? Uh how do I make how do I know whether the keys are

going to exist? Because again I'm I'm going to be I'm going to be using these tries for uh for giving key find the things that I want range a bit more tricky because you have to bounce up and back but we we're ignoring that for now. But the the use case you're talking about would be handled just fine because I say if I if I know for hat it's h at I don't follow the what are pointer down to the next the next letters the digits I just stop if there's a pointer I say

no there's something exactly this key >> yes >> question the question is how does this work for strings and ins give me a second just fine no problem right what is what is a string Assume it's asky. What is it? >> Yeah, it's a if it's ASKY, they're always eight bytes. It's just an integer. So there's Yeah, there's no big deal. Uh other data other data types, I don't have slides for this. Other data types are more tricky. Um like floats can be tricky uh because it

depends on as well. Like we'll ignore that. We're ignoring all that. Assume it's eight. It's ask 8 bit characters. Okay. So what's really cool about tries is that they don't require rebalancing. Um not always, but the the other cool thing is that the the the data structure like the layout of of the actual nodes in within our data structure doesn't depend on the order in which you insert things or delete things. It just depends on the keys. So no matter how what order you insert the

keys into your data structure, you're always going to end up with the same sort of layout. And this can then guarantee that any lookup is always going to be uh okay in time where K is the the length of the key that you're looking for. So if I'm looking for the you know for for hello right that has five characters. I in this you know my example here I know I'm going to have to look for at least five characters to find the thing whether the thing exists or not. Right? And the way you just traverse you

just as as every time you go down a level you just look for the next next character or digit that you want and if it's not there then you know it's not there if it is there then you follow the pointer to find the thing you want. So in the same way we define B plus trees as sort of Mway data structure where M is the number of the the number of pointers coming out of it. In a try, we would say the span of the try is the number of bits or digits we're going to represent uh in in every level of of the

of of the try. All right? And then if the digit exists in the corpus or the keys that we're trying to to to maintain in our data structure, then we have to have a pointer to the next level. Otherwise, we just say it's it's null. We don't want to represent it. And then the fan out would be the the at every node, how many things are coming out of it. And then that also then determines what the height of the physical tree is. So let's look at a really trivial example. Uh what they were asking for

how do you how would you represent integers in this? Let's say we want to sort uh three keys 10 25 and and 31. So for this one we're going to store this in a one bit span try. So that means that every single level or every node in a try is going to represent one bit in the value you want to store. In a real system, you wouldn't want to go you wouldn't go by bits. You'd go by bytes or something maybe even larger. Uh but for simplicity, we'll go we'll go with this. So to insert these records to to

insert these keys in this uh try would essentially look like this again where every single level in our try represents just one bit position in the keys that we're trying to store. Right? So these are the the bit representation of keys 10 25 31. And then for uh for simplicity instead of saying you know drawing all the bits out I just put repeat 10 right you would have a bunch of extra nodes for that. So now the first level a try is bit position zero. They're all zeros. So we just have a pointer at the zero

position in our in our node jump down to uh the the next level. Whereas for the one for the position one, the bit one, it just goes to null. So if anybody's looking for a key where the first bit is set to one, I would jump in the first node. See that one is mapped to to null and therefore I know the key doesn't exist. I can stop my search again. The next level they're all zeros and repeat this 10 times for for simplicity. Then we now get down to this level here where now we actually have uh different

differentiating values. So we have some of the keys are set to zero at this position. some of the keys are set to one. So I have again pointers coming out of of both of them. So now say I go down here now I see have one zero one zero and then same thing I have uh I have different levels of those bit positions and just mapping down and then when I get to the bottom right it'll be a record ID or a pointer to something like this is the value that we're trying to then represent in in this trial.

So jumping ahead this is actually kind of inefficient, right? Um jumping ahead. Sorry. Um ignoring the fact we're storing zero and one, we could just represent that as just in one bit instead of two bits, right? Uh because if you had characters, you wouldn't be able to easily do that or sorting bytes wouldn't be easily do that. But in this case here, we we see that we have a bunch of these uh bunch [clears throat] of these nodes where we're not actually storing any differentiating information,

right? Like we don't need to store that we have one of the bits set to one and one like one of the bits is set, the other one is not set or one is null, one's not null. So instead we can do sort of horizontal compression with each with each level. just remove the values that we don't care about and only store those. Right? If we don't have a key, we don't want your keys to have someone set to one, someone set to zero at any given level, we just store whatever the the value actually is at that bit and with

just the pointer to the next level. But then we can compress this even further because we see on this case over here on the side or the bottom ones, it's kind of a straight path to the leaf nodes, right? Like for this one over here, zero set 0 0 0 going forth, right? We don't need to record anything information, extra information about this. Um, so instead we can do what's called vertical compression and just truncate the try and say the key that you want exists here or the key that you're

looking for would exist here, but rather than me storing the entire key, I'm just going to stop the the the the branch going down and just have a pointer immediately to the record that I want. So if you do this, this is called a rate x tree. Rate x tree is this compressed form of of a try. Uh where again you're doing vertical compression. Now if you truncate those branches, it's going to end up being a probabistic data structure in that you may get actually false positives because it may tell you

a key exists when it doesn't actually does not because you don't have the full key embedded in the try. So you got to follow the pointer to go then go look up and see whether the key that you want is actually there or not. Right? Or you could use this again as a filter and say yeah it's there or not there or might might be there. [clears throat] But most systems will use this as uh as actual index not a not a filter. So when when systems say they're using tries 99% of the time they're using a rate

extreme. All right. because again it's it's uh it's a compressed form of try without have without having to store all possible combinations of a key at at every single level. There's a bunch of systems that use this and and what's interesting is that even though the try is really old, the uh there's been a sort of resurgence in the last 10 years of a bunch of systems saying, "Hey, look, tries are actually a good idea. We should we should be doing this instead of B+ trees in some cases, right? Or

instead instead of skipless like Cassandra was using skip list for their mem table uh for their lovers tree and got rid of that switch to to a a rad tree." Yes. The question is before I did this compression uh was it it was deterministic and then when I did this compression it made it proistic more like it's deterministic the structure itself is deterministic meaning like no matter what order I insert the keys it's always going to have sort of the same this level has this this level has that and

so forth right the probabilistic part comes to be like if I do this truncation I I I may do a lookup and find a match for the key that takes me to the bottom and then I then but then I have to follow the point to see whether it actually exists or not. Um is basically giving me a false positive on saying the key exists when it doesn't actually because I'm throwing away information when I do this truncation. So the truncation part is what where you get the the the the false positive. The compression doesn't give you that. So

going back here like for for this path here like I have uh it's a straight line down. So if I didn't do the compression over here then I end up with like a um how to say this? [snorts] I don't know where the key exists even though I landed at the I think the key might exist even though I landed at the at a leaf node in the try. So then I have to follow the the pointer to figure out whether actually does exist or not. >> Yes. >> Question is is this a data structure you would be inserting keys into? Yes.

>> Yes. Question is what happens if you start inserting a key that then follows along path. You'd have to expand that two slides. We we'll handle that. Yes. >> Yes. uh the question when I say check the original to see what the key matches I don't know what the record pointer is actually I don't care what the record pointer is actually pointing to it maybe the might be a table heap I go check that page the the data structure could be for the storing the tupil is is the

B+ tree doesn't matter whatever whatever the the final resting place of the tupil is I got to go check it to see whether it's actually a match or not think of like when I do a we were doing that linear hashing or linear linear probe hashing I hashed my my key. I landed somewhere in the hash table. I can't just say I'm done because I landed somewhere in the hash table and that's occupied by something. I got to go and check the key in that hash table to see whether it's actually the one I'm

actually looking for. Same idea. I got to go follow something to go look at the original tupil because I've thrown away some information to compress it. The question is the the for the complexity of this is same as what? His question is is the complexity of a compressed try o or >> uh it is still I mean so like yeah so if if it's if it's a if it's an index if it's a unique index then whatever I'm pointing to uh it's either going to be the key I want or not the key I want. So

So that's a one lookup. To your other point of like if it's a non-unique index, >> what's that? >> You have to match key. Yeah. So >> because it's on the >> it's okay plus one. >> It'll be what will be faster? Sorry. They won't have to jump in different locations. >> Uh I think so I think what you're saying is uh that if it's if it's talking are we talking about press try or non-cressed try? It doesn't matter. >> Non-compressed try. I I look at my key

then so the number of things I got to look down is is is the length of the key. Yes. >> Different locationations not the same block >> typically. Yes. >> So what he's saying here if I compress it down this is like a really trivial example but I compress this down then everything be inside a single block. >> Uh sorry say the last one again. Sorry. >> Yes. The keys the keys somewhere else. Sorry the original tupil somewhere else. So whether it's compressed or not, uh,

sorry, if it is compressed, then I got to go follow the pointer to go see whether the key actually does match or not. If it is not compressed, the key might not exist. I I get the bottom of the try and I'm done. If I get to the bottom try and it is a match, then I still got to go follow the pointer to get get the two follow the the the record I need to get the tuple. >> You good or no? >> So you're just doing all this work to make sure you're not like So that exist the whole point of index is is us

for like not to do a sequential scan on everything to be able to say for a given key go does this thing exist not and if it does tell me exactly where to go get it. So I don't think because I want to avoid scan of of the tables. Again, think of extremes. If I have a billion tupils, I don't want to scan a billion tupils to go find the record I want. If I have a data structure that again, it's a little larger. Sorry, it's an extra space, extra computational cost to maintain this thing, but I'm avoiding

that sequential scan. That's usually going to be a good trade-off. All right. So tries again they're an old data structure but there's been a resurgence and in the last 10 years a bunch of systems actually using it and it all comes from the Germans who built the system called hyper and then so ductb uses a version of their try because ductb saw their papers and wrote the same thing and then the hyper guys sold his native system to Tableau which got bought by Salesforce and then he rewrote a new system called Umbra uh

that also uses this try index but then Umbra got forked off as a commercial product called called Cedar DB um but Reddus and SQL light and a bunch of other systems use this internally. You sometimes see see this in literature called Patricia trees. Uh I looked this up and it's actually from like Don Canoose books from the like all all computer science in the 1970s and there's a data structure there's a version of this called practical algorithm to retrieve information coded and alphabetic and so petition trees uh

come from that acronym again sometimes you see called radius trees or just tries or partition trees they're all they're all roughly the same thing. All right, let's quickly talk about how we want to handle uh modifications. Say now we have a a try looks like this. And now with any every node, I can actually store multiple keys inside them. They're they're they are uh they're very length, but we know how to handle that using sort of roughly the slot and pay architecture that we saw before. So if I

want toert hair, right, I know it should go here. So I just follow the pointers down, find a free slot in this this note here, and insert my entry. If I want to delete hat, right? Follow the pointer down to h a t find t go ahead and delete that. That's fine. But then now we can decide that if we we delete have now we only have one entry in this bottom node here. So in some implementations of tries or adaptive rad arts uh they can decide okay well I don't want to have this guy hanging out by himself because

then it's a straight path from a down to a IR. Again, I I could do that vertical compression and move IR up and everything's just fine. I'm glossing over the details this quite a bit, but that's roughly how these algorithms work. So, I quickly just want to mention that there's a bunch of implementation one implementations of this. Again, surfy mentioned before the art index is the one from hyper that ductb uses as well. There's another one called Judy arrays which is sort of the first radex tree

that allowed the sort of the adaptive nodes moving things up and down. Uh this is about HP but they wrote a patent on it and so for years it would show up on Hacker News saying like hey there's this cool thing called Judy Rays be nice if we can implement this but there's this patent. Um and then even though the authors of the of the the actual Judy Ray said oh HP won't sue you trust us. Uh nobody actually end up actually implemented. It's off patent as of like two years ago, but as far as I know, I'm

not aware of any other system do it using it. They're instead they're all using the the art index, but rough basically roughly idea is the same thing, but you can have these adaptive node uh layouts and you can move you can resize them based on what the keys you want to store. >> All right. So, in the last half an hour, I want to go through uh uh full text search indexes and and vector indexes. Yes. >> Question. The question is what in what scenarios would would a RAX tree be

better than a B+ tree? Uh for range scans, B+ is going to be better. Uh for large keys, tries will typically be better because they're more they're more compressed. Um >> for what's that? >> Like point like point lookups. Yeah. Like if I'm looking for a single key, tries would probably be better if if the tries aren't if the if the keys are really big. Again, it's a cop. I'm saying it depends. Like if I'm doing like a bunch of lookups on keys that don't exist, try is going to be way

faster because like if I don't see it in the first node, I'm done. >> But if I do range scans, the B+ tries be better. Yeah. And typically in in most systems, they'll implement either B+ trees or or the radex trees you for as table indexes, they don't do both. whereas like some they'll have the hash table indexes plus the B plus trees but they won't have two they won't usually implement two data structures. Um, okay. So, all all the indexes we talked about, all the dashes we talked about so far

are fantastic for doing what again called point queries. Go find Andy's bank account or, you know, go get your single uh user account and for range scans, right? Find all the people within uh, you know, that born within some some date range, right? What they're not good at are sort of keyword searches. So meaning like find all the articles where the the the the term or the word Pavlo appears because think about how would you do that in your B+ tree because the key has to be the entire uh of the index has to be

whatever the entire value is for a given column. So if I just sort of show example like Wikipedia we had this sort of revision table there was this column called content that was just the text field of whatever somebody entered in when they they wrote the Wikipedia article. So if I build an index on this like a B+ tree or try it doesn't matter then I'm not picking out the individual keys or sorry individual words of the column it's the entire column so I can't do a query like this like uh

on an index like find all the the the find all the records where the content contains the keyword Pavlo because the B+ tree doesn't know how to pick apart the individual words. it just it's going to see try to do a match on the entire thing. So this is always going to end up being a sequential scan in a system, right? It's actually incorrect query anyway because like because the wild card at the end could match like someone like there's a Russian scientist Pavlov with the V at the end. It would match

them not maybe exactly what I'm looking for. So this is what an inverted index is going to solve for us. Okay, sometime sometimes called a full text search index. And the basic idea is that for a for a given uh given column or attribute within in a table we want to build this index on we're going to pull out the individual words or terms in in the in the the the data and build an index on those things rather than the the entire the entire uh uh value. Right? So this is again sometimes called full text indexes. In

like medieval times they were called concordances. Like there were some monks back in the 1200s that went like they some guy had a bunch of people like read the Bible and create a mapping list of like for here's every word in the Bible like a glossery and what pages it appear on the same idea right and then a bunch of database systems are now going to support these uh not they're not always great and then the the the SQL syntax of how to use them is going to vary widely uh between one system to the next but the general

idea of how they're going to work is is going to be the So we take this again the content field here uh of this table and we're going to pull out all the individual terms. We'll talk a second how we actually do that. Uh and then we'll have this thing this dictionary data structure where for every single term we'll keep a counter how many times we've seen the the the the term and then it'll be then have a pointer to what we call a posting list. were just going to be the record ids of

the uh of of the the tupils that had this particular term in in in the data struct or sorry term in the in the column we built the index on right so term frequency and so forth. So there's a bunch of these sort of specialized storage engines or storage managers that'll give you these these sort of uh these full these inverted indexes and that's all pretty much all they do is just do the inverted index like they're not meant to be the primary storage of of of your database uh right but like you you you can build

a larger system on top of that. So, Lucine is probably the most famous one of all these, right? It's written in Java. It's widely used. Zapion is is one of C++. The new hot one now is Tantib, which is basically Lucine but written in in in Rust. And again, they're basically building these things and they have various uh ways to tokenize them and split things up other other things. And then there's larger systems that build on top of this uh that have these uh again that expose a sometimes a SQL

interface expose custom API then allows you to do queries on top of uh of these inverted indexes and this space is super popular. Elastic search is probably they're a public company. They're probably the biggest one in the space but then they changed the license and people didn't like that. So then Amazon 410 became open search. Um Splunk is a really old one. They got bought by Cisco last year. quit quit just got by bought by data dog in in January, right? So the these things are widely used and they're pretty popular.

Even though again your your you know your favorite relational data system like Postgress and others will have these kind of these functionality built in, they're not going to be as sophisticated as as uh this the specialized engines like lucine and tint. All right. So let me show what an inverted index looks like for lucine and then I'll show what what what the postcrist looks like. So in lucine the basic data structure we're going to use is called a finite state transducer and it's basically going to be like a try

where we're going to break apart the the digits within the keys we want to represent uh or the terms we want to represent but then rather than being a a pointer to where the record actually exists, we're actually going to use the weights in the data structure to determine the offset in this sorted dictionary of keys or terms. So it looks sort of like this. So say I want to look up and find find the key pav pav. So I I have my entry point into the data structure and this try I'm going to look at the different branches

or different possible keys that I have at this level and that's going to tell me whether I want to go left or right or whatever down what path. And then at every edge here I'm gonna have a weight that's going to of course that I'm going to use to then sum up all the weights to get to either a terminating point or the key that I want. And that's going to tell me what offset I want to jump to in my in my dictionary. So again, looking for PAV. I follow the edge down on P on P. Uh that edge has a

weight of two. So I add two to my offset. Then I want to find find now A, right? Follow that path here. That edge has a weight of one. My offset now goes to three. Then I I want to find V. That's a straight path to the bottom. This terminating node here. The weight is zero. So my offset is three. And I just jump to my jump to the that location in my dictionary and I find what I want. Pretty cool. So the the data structure itself is is not immutable. Uh you can you can you can uh you can sorry it is immutable

meaning like I can't add new keys to this because that would change the weights and and mess things up. So the way it works in lucine is that you basically do a batch insert, build the trans transducer and then freeze it and then any new keys get inserted, you're going to build another, you know, build another transucer for that. And then there's a background job that then merges this together to compute larger transducers. So you're not storing the keys over and over again uh across

different dictionaries, right? Basically removing redundancies. So we can do all the same things that we talked about before uh in our dictionary like the bit packing stuff and the delta encoding to to reduce the size of of these data structures. So this idea is pretty cool. In Postgress they use they have something what's called the generalized inverted index and they're actually you're going to build upon the sorry in the back. Yes. >> How do you get the weights? You compute

them. Do you have all the keys ahead of time and then you you you sort the keys in alphabetical order right and then based on that you can then build the the transucer graph. Again that's why it's immutable because if I add more keys like if I add key uh I don't know uh jelly like with a j that would go in between bar rav and pav I would have to change the weights and have to rebuild the whole the whole graph so that's why they make it immutable all right in postgress they're going to

use what they call the g generalized inverted index the jin and what that's basically the dictionary is going to be a b+ tree using the existing B+ tree they already have and then for the posting list they're going to be at the at the leaf node So in the leaf nodes if the number of records that map to a single particular term or key you're looking for again I want to use the word ter term I use I want to use term not key because key would sort of imply like the like the entire uh entire value of a column we're

trying to build index on this is like a portion of it so if you have a given term have a lot of uh have a small number of record ids that are matching for it then your posting list are just uh just arrays uh with values But then this goes above a threshold you and you don't want to have do a sequential scan every single time to find all the things you you know you may be looking for in these posting lists. They'll then convert the posting list into a another B+ tree. So you basically end up with a

a forest of trees. So you have a tree to get into the looking for terms and then the leaf node may end up pointing to the entry point of another B+ tree where you're maintaining the sort of list of of the posting ids. Now maintaining this again is going to be expensive. Uh so to avoid the overhead of doing that every single time you do do an insert update delete, they're going to bring in a mod log just like we saw many times before this semester where all my updates will get absorbed into that mod log and then

there's a background job that runs through and compacts it and merges everything into the main dictionary. So beyond just doing uh you know for given key or sorry given term find me all the the records that have this term in it some other things you can do to to with these these full text search indexes that are really cool uh you can use them for ranking. So instead of just saying go me find find me all the the records where this this term exists, you want to know what's the importance of the different

uh records that match, right? So again, if I'm if I'm doing a look up on the word like Wuang, I'm gonna I could potentially get a lot of articles on Wikipedia that match that, but the one that's probably the most important is the one where Wuang appears the most, likely the article about the Wuang clan. And that will have a higher importance if I just use a simple ranking algorithm that says what's the frequency of this term appearing in a in a in a given uh record relative to the

appearance in all the other records. This helps you avoid things like the word 'the' that's going to appear every word everywhere and so that you don't end up weird with weird rankings because you know that term appears everywhere as well. So TF is the the basic one that things like Postgress do. But then the like lucine and the other like sort of specialized search engine systems uh with full text search indexes they can do BM25 which is enhanced version of this. Basically if you have a key that's

repeated a ton of uh a term that's repeated over and over again at some point it the the its weight decays because it's like it's not overflooded with that term over and over again. If an article has nothing but the word wuang in it with no other words in it, uh you don't want that thing to maybe always be the most important thing because it's kind of kind of full of garbage. So again, the the the other the not all the the data systems that like the relational data systems that support

full text full text inverted indexes uh can do do the more sophisticated things like postgress only does TF. You have to use uh extensions and add-ons to get BM25. I don't know what Oracle and um uh SQL server do. The other thing you can also do to improve search is to do run these things through tokenizers. So my simple example, I just said, "All right, I'll split all the split the the the column attribute based on the space." But like there may be sometimes where uh if I want to do like a fuzzy match, find

things where people even though they they misspell the words, uh I can run this through a tokenizer that can rewrite the the terms into engrams or do other things like remove move hyphens or map things like u us u it's the same thing as USA without the periods. So there's a bunch of other tricks you can do to improve search. So with an engram uh tokenizer, you basically take the term wuang and then if I want to make triagrams, I just have all combinations or of consecutive uh characters up to uh the three letters.

So now I can do fuzzy matches of like someone only writes, you know, someone searches like, you know, uh Muan instead of the G, I can still do a match on that. Whereas if I'm just using an inverted index without this tokenization, then I I can only do exact matches. What's that? Oh, that's a typo. Yeah. Question is, why does UTA appear twice? That's a typo, right? Thank you. I'll fix that. All right. So these inverted indexes are useful for again looking for contents uh based on on the on the keywords but

it's kind of like trying to do almost an exact match like does this keyword exist and you can play some games like Wuang with a hyphen can be matched to Wuang without the hyphen or Wuang without the space. The tokenizer can can sort of handle that. But what you can't do uh is do searches based on the meaning of what the actual the data actually represents. Right? So I can't I can't ask my databases with a full text or verted index and say find me all the songs that talk about you know people slinging or

doing doing some action unless I can do a lookup exactly on all possible combinations of the the synonyms for that action for for that idea right because it's just trying to match bits in the index it can't match can deeper it doesn't have any deeper meaning about what the uh what's actually in your data So this is what the similarity search that people are doing or the rag stuff people are doing in in in modern AI systems, right? And you can just build this directly in your data system and do

this. It's just another index. So let's say again I have my table of all my albums and and for whatever reason I have a column in there with all the lyrics for all the songs in every album. Obviously you would not want to store it to album. You store it per song. We can ignore that. So what I'm going to do is I'm going to take all that those that text column. I'm going to run it through my favorite transformer. Open a has one. There's a bunch of hugging faces. There's the original one. Uh, word

tovec, right? Whatever, whatever I want. Some it's going to convert free form text into a fixed length array of floatingoint numbers called an embedding. And then I can take those embeddings, store this in in a vector index. Not saying what this is yet, we'll cover that in the next few slides, but like there's some way for now for me to do lookups on on those embeddings in an efficient manner. So now when my query comes along and here I'm showing free form text instead of SQL, but you

could put whatever the search term in SQL if you wanted and I say find me all the lyrics about running from the police. So I take that running from the police portion uh and I run it through my same transformer and somehow magically it it it generates an embedding that that represents that that search term and then now I do a approximate nearest neighbor search in my vector index based on that embedding that I got and it's going to produce a rank list of of of record IDs that somehow semantically match the thing I'm

looking for. like the semantic meaning of the search term running from the police is somehow through the transformer embided in that or imbued in that that that vector of of of floatingoint numbers right the floatingoint numbers aren't meant to be read understood by humans just the transformer magically does that for because that that's what it's trained on I can also do other things like store additional metadata that is in my table in my vector index so that if I have additional queries I want to do lookups

on semantic meaning and additional qualifiers. I instead of having do sequential scan, I can do all the searches inside of the index. So if I want to find all the songs that talk about running for the police and released after 2005, I take again that search term, run that through my transformer, I get an embedding, but then I can also pass along and when I do my lookup uh the qualifier year greater than 2005. So now as I'm doing my approximate nearest neighbor search inside this thing, uh I can also throw away entries

that doesn't match that second qualifier. And there's a question like do you do you do the the year filter first before you do the embedding lookup? You know there's there's no good answer how to do that. So the magic is of makes this all work is called a vector index. And this is a specialized data structure that's explicitly designed to do nearest neighbor approximate nearest neighbor searches on these embeddings. We're just going to be a a one-dimensional uh array of floating point numbers. And the array

is always has to be fixed. It's always fixed length meaning like the the size of one embedding from one one record to the next record is always going to be the same because that's what the trans transformer generates. So the challenge in this is that just like we talk about ranking like you know how do I how do I get a bunch of results and then rank them in order of importance in semantic search it gets kind of really fuzzy because like there's no because the transformer is doing this magic to convert free form

text or whatever it is we want to look up on into this embedding and somehow the embedding represents some higher level meaning that that we've extracted from the data we're trying to look up on or store. there's no guarantee that we're going to find exactly the the the results that we want. So you kind of just go by what what what feels good enough, what feels okay, right? So there's a bunch of different data structures you can use uh sorry a bunch of different uh specialized database

systems uh that you can use to do these things like pine cone, weate middle are probably the main ones. Um but pretty much every relational data system that people are actively using today and actively maintained has their own uh vector index. Postgress has PG vector Oracle my SQL actually my SQL I don't know like Oracle SQL server everyone everyone has a a uh a vector index now and the two main data structures you're going to use is either going to be an inverted index like we just talked about

or a graph index I'll go through both of those. So in inverted index the basic idea is that we're going to we want to maintain a uh a mapping from from some some uh some location in this high high dimensional space to the the records that match the the you know have have an embedding that's close to the one that we're trying to do a lookup on. Right? So the basic ways it works is you just sort of scan through your data ahead of time. you're going to do uh run your K means clustering algorithm where K is

defined whatever uh it's a black magic how you assign it but like it's it's usually not that not quite large. Um and then you're going to then do lookups by just running the same clustering algorithm to jump into that high dimensional space and figure out what are all the the the records that are close to you in the cluster. Right? So look at an example. So say we have all the embeddings we got from the lyrics and so in the first pass we want we want to compute K's cluster. We're

going to figure out what how to cluster these guys into a lower dimensional space uh that allows us to find things that that are similar to each other. So I'm just going to sequential scan through the data and place clusters on a again in a high dimensional space here. Right? I'm showing two dimensions but in actuality it would be much larger. And I want to do this for all the other all the other uh key embeddings I have in my data set. So then now I'm going to run my clustering algorithm that's going

to then generate a bunch of different regions. And then for each cluster, I'm going to compute the centrid, like what's the central location that's closest to to to all the the points in in my cluster. And then now once I have my my centroidids, I'm going to build a and basically an index inverted index that's going to map these centrids to the records that exist in in my cluster, right? Because what's now what we'll do is for a new embedding key that shows up. I run it through or so you for new

key I want to do a look up on term I want to look up for I I I run it through my transformer I end up with again this this fixed one dimensional array of embeddings and then I run the c mean you know I just compute where it exists in high dimensional space what cluster it exists in that's going to give me the centroidid and then the mapping then from the posting list is just going to be the the records that are close to this in in the space and somehow through the embedding I I know these things are

similar to each other semantically pretty pretty basic right the challenge of course is how do you maintain this right so if you if I insert a bunch of new keys then that's going to put you the clustering may get out of whack and therefore my results may not be as accurate so you can either do this in a sort of partition manner like I like it we did with uh lucine where you sort of build that dictionary list once make that immutable and then build another one for new ones to come in and occasionally and combine them and recmp

compute stuff. Right? The basic idea is the same. The alternative approach is to do uh do a graph search and the idea here is that we're going to build now a a graph of our of our our of our embeddings again in high dimensional space. And then for each for each point in the high dimensional space, we're compute the the atmost and nearest neighbors and maintain an edge between them. And this edge is going to how we're going to traverse along this this between the different entries until we can narrow

down and find the the one that we think is the best match for what we're looking. So let's say that the embedding we want to find is this search vector here. Again, it's in my query. I run it through my transformer. I get an embedding and then it I plop it down in my high dimensional space like this. And so for this graph data structure, I always have to have an entry point like where can where am I allowed to start? because I maintain a pointer something somewhere that says how do I start doing

traversal into this. So at this first location here I'm going to look at all my neighbors that this this node is connected to and for each of those I'm just basically going to compute their distance according to some some some function of how close they are to my search vector because I know what my search vector is. So I know I know what the location I want to get to but I'm trying to find all the ones that are that are close to it. So in this case here it's this one at the top. So, we're

going to follow that pointer and then do the same thing. Look at all the other entries that I'm I'm connected to. Figure out who's closer. Jump along to this and then I land to the one that I want. Pretty cool. But again, think in extremes. If I have uh you know trillion records doing this this graph traversal traversal is going to be expensive. So the optimization people use is what's called HNSW or hierarchal graphs or hierarchal navigable small worlds where you basically have multiple layers of

graphs and you start at the top and you follow a bunch of these you follow the traversals and a smaller subset of the graph at the top and then when you exhaust your search at the top level you go down. So there's pointers going down to the nodes below you. What does it smell like? I think you just said it. Skipless. Exactly right. Same idea. When I when I build these, I have I always have my graph at the bottom. When I add the layers at the top, I'll flip a coin, decide whether I want to keep a node there or not. And

then I and then that way like as I progressively go to the top the number of nodes are smaller because I can do that search more quickly and then narrow down to the result that I want. Right? A lot of stuff's not new even though it's AI. They're borrowing ideas from skip list from the 1990s. Right? So again this is the search vector I want. I start at the top level. I enter enter my graph here. In this case here I I only have one neighbor. I know it's closer to than my starting point. I want to traverse down. Come

down now to the second level, right? Do the same thing. Look at all my neighbors. See that this one at the bottom is is closer. I go there and jump to this one. Go there. Jump down here. And then my search is done. >> Yes. >> Question. How do you store a graph a graph representation in a relational data system? Uh you just have a table for nodes and then you have a table as the dig matrix for edges. So question is so there are so so he's sort of asking like would I store this as a table you could

the vector index implementations do not they would store this as a specialized graph data structures you're you're stepping on a landmine here so I'm of the opinion that graph databases are a bad idea and the better way to store graph classes is in a relational database system and there's a bunch of algorithms that we won't cover so much this class but there's there's optimized algorithms to do graph traversal very efficiently on relational data whereas relational data people like

the Neo4j people they would say oh no you want to store things as like node and and and and edges explicitly and you just sort of you follow those pointers in your data structure when you want to do graph traversals in a modern relational data system that does a bunch of these enhanced uh uh a fancy query processing techniques. We'll talk a little about them in a few weeks, but you can rip through that GC matrix very quickly. Think of like running through a column store, but there's other tricks

you can do where you know if you're traversing a graph, you can you can do things more efficiently than you would if it was regular tupils. Then in SQL 2023 in the in the standard, they added now property graph queries. So now in SQL you can define graphs over existing tables and you can do things that look like cipher graph queries in SQL directly because one of the things that like the graph databases will do better than than a relational data system is if I'm doing node traversal there's got to be logic to decide like

okay I'm at this node where do I go next and if you just do that in the application now you're going back and forth between the the application the client and a data server and a bunch of network round trips whereas the graph database guys have a single API say you know traverse this graph and everything runs on the server side when they added property graph queries to SQL. Now you can define that traversal logic all in SQL. So there's no round trip. Everything's done on the server side.

>> So database that >> question is what data is implement that only Oracle at this point. There's an extensor for DTB to add property graphs. Uh I don't think it made it mainline branch, but there's a paper I'm happy to share on piaza from like two years ago. They mop the floor out of ductb crushes like Neo4j and all these other systems by adding some of these addition. They don't add all the enhancements but just some of them crush Neo and Neoforj is a not a good system not sorry

let me face that Neoforj is a poorly written system as if that's better so yeah usually the graph databases they'll they'll get if a relational data system natively supports graph uh and uh some of the uh query passing techniques where you own graphs they'll crush any graph database don't use a graph database >> yes As a question, how is PG vector implementing their data structure? So, PG vector is the why they use extension in Postgress that give you vector search. They have both. They'll have

they started off the the inverted index, the IBF flap uh and then they added HNSW I think last year, right? It's written by like one it was written by one dude, right? He's just doing it because he wanted to do it and then uh the PG vector guy and then it's got a lot of traction. I think Amazon's thrown some time at like it's it's pretty it's pretty good and for for for I don't know 90% of the use cases it's probably good enough for my people the in the same way

that like elastic search and Vespa and and these other specialized full text search database systems they will have a uh more sophisticated algorithms and data structures to do inverted indexes than Postgress and other relation data systems uh the specialized vector databases like a pine cone, like a weev8 and so forth, they're going to have a bunch of enhancements that like PG vector is going to have, but for most people, PG vector is probably been good enough. >> Yes. >> Yes. Question like what am I searching

here? It's nearest neighbors. I want to find all the the depending on how many nodes I want to get back, how many entries I want to get back. I want to find the what which vertices is the closest to me. that you have >> all the points in the entire graph. >> No, but like if if my my graph has a billion nodes and I want the top 10, I I would, you know, if I do this, I can skip a bunch of the the rest of the graph and jump, you know, get closer to the location, land in the bottom part

here and then kind of expand out till I find the 10 the 10. If I'm looking for 10, find the 10 nodes that that match. Okay. All right. So, I missed this last class and I but I do want to talk about because I think it's just kind of cool. I'm going to show you one last thing of extra stuff you can do with indexes. So, regardless of whether you're using escape list, try whatever you want. Uh there's some actually some cool things you can add in in SQL to make your indexes even better. So, the first one

is you can do what's called partial indexes. So every single time when I declared indexes before I would call you know create create index on table whatever and without a partial qualifier it's going to build the index on the entire all the tupils in in that in that table but I can add a qualifier like this like a wear clause in my create index statement to then say only build the indexes on the tupils that match this. So what this allows me to do is like tricks like this where if now I have a

query like select B from fu where A equals 1 23 and C equals Wuang I can actually just take this first predicate here look in the catalog and say oh this this index I want is a qualifies this and therefore now when I do my lookup on a uh I don't need actually check the C2 C values because I know that if it's if it's in this index it has to match that that my wear clause. So it's an extra check I I don't have to do I only have to do it once in the catalog see whether the the index matches for me.

Furthermore now my index is going to be much smaller take less space in memory uh and we be way more inefficient because I'm throwing away a bunch of stuff that I don't need. So typically you see this in um people create separate indexes for events that occur like on a per month per year. So every month you're going to create a new index. is when I want to look up all the events that happened, what what are the all the orders that that occurred in the month of September, I'll have an um I'll

have my September 25 index and that's a fast look up to go get that. So that's super cool. The other thing you can do is call it include columns. So again when we talked about uh storing data in indexes uh again whether it's B plus whatever you want like all the attributes whatever defined as the key they're going to be stored within the within all the the nodes in in the data structure but I can add this include qualifier where I say this is not what the key is based on. So in this case

here the key is still based on A and B but in the leaf nodes I'm in the B+ tree I'll throw in C. So now if I have queries like this same before selects you know selects uh B from fu where A equals 1 2 3 and C equals Wuang the B and A part I'm going to get from the index and then when I get to the leaf node then I just check the the the C C attribute and if it matches then actually in this case here I'm done. I actually don't even need to look at the original tupil because it's called a

covering index. Everything I need for this query is in the index. I didn't have to go look at the original tupil or if it doesn't match on the wuang then I know don't follow pointer anyway right so again this is called a covering index or called index only scans this is a huge win if you're not storing an index organized table of your table heaps if you can pack a bunch of crap in the leaf nodes you know you obviously don't want to put the entire table then all my queries just touch indexes and I

never go look at the original tables and that's much much faster all right again I just think it's kind of cool I think you guys be aware of it that you can do this extra stuff and Postgress and Postgress can do this and all the enterprise systems can do this. So when Postgress says they're the best open source enterprise data system, it's because they have a bunch of these extra features that like my SQL and others don't have. Okay, so as I said we we went through a lot again this this is a

a buffet of cool data structures for databases. We'll see filters again when we talk about joins. B+ trees are still going to be default choice for indexes. We if you love inverted indexes there's a whole course on this in LTI and then there's a whole another data structure we didn't talk about called R trees or Katy trees uh where think of them as like lowdimensional vector indexes like if I want to like bounding boxes with within like geospatial stuff like find me all the what's the bounding region of

of of zip code 15217 I could represent this in one of these data structures there's a whole another course on that from 15826 I don't know how often that's taught that they cover those All right. So, next class we will break the assumption that we had so far is that all our data structures are single threaded. We will make them multi-threaded and talk about how to make them thread safe. Okay. Project two or project one is due this Sunday. Make sure you do that. And then office hours

are on Saturday. Okay. Hit it. >> [music] >> Flips over [music] [music] the fortune [ __ ] maintain [music] flow with the brain. Get the [ __ ] maintain flow [music] with the brain.

