[Music] I'm still associated [Music] cash. Thank you. How's your radio show going? I heard it's popping off. >> Uh, you know, what can I say? >> People call people call in for requests or >> Yeah, sometimes. >> Okay. Uh, again, that's on Sundays at >> at 100 p.m. >> It's and streaming on the internet, too, right? So, people outside out if you're outside the university, you can check out GG Cash's radio show every Sunday at 1 o'clock Eastern. All right, you guys

in the class, we have a lot to cover today. Today's going to be awesome lecture. I I say that every lecture, but this one's super They're all fun. I like this one a lot, though. Um, for you guys again, homework, sorry, project one was due last night. Uh, I think we're missing about still maybe 10 submissions from people. Uh, I haven't checked the leaderboard yet. Um, they look somebody is blowing everyone else out. We have to understand why. Um, so if you haven't finished project one, please do that as

soon as soon as possible. Uh, project two is out live today. Uh, the so you want to pull down the latest code, the writeup is available on the website. Homework three came out last week. that'll be due this this Sunday coming up because the goal is for to give you guys graded response uh on the following Monday immediately afterwards because it'll cover things that'll be on the exam uh coming up next week in class on Wednesday the 8th. Okay, any questions about any of these? Again, homework three is due this

Sunday. Project two is due after the fall break. Uh but the midterm will be next week and I'll post the study guide and the practice exam after class later today. I just everything's done is haven't I haven't put uh haven't posted on um on Piaza yet. Okay. And then the practice game will look roughly like what the real exam will be a a little bit more longer though than what the live one will be. Okay. All right. So again for additional database talks if you can't get enough of

databases uh today we have the creator of Apache Hoodie or HUD uh giving a talk with us after class at 4:30 over Zoom. And then next week we have the mother duck guys giving a talk about duck lake which is an alternative to hoodie and iceberg. And then in two weeks after that we'll have the spyrob guys g talk about a new file format that they've created to replace parquet and orc called vortex. So if you're familiar with parquet it's from 2013 developed by dreo and cloudera. It might be Twitter

and might be part of that too. And then orc came out of Facebook. And so these are these are sort of columnar based file formats to follow the pax format stuff we talked about before. Uh but it's like an open source library you can use to rewrite these things. So vortex is is a modern version of all this using like sort of the state of the art encoding techniques. Again this is optional. These are the things you want if you want to go beyond course uh please feel free to join us. All right.

So for the last two classes we've talked about data structures. uh again in the context of table indexes or being used internal structures like a page table for your database system. We we made a pretty big assumption that when we discussed these data structures and the algorithms we would use to interact with them or manipulate them, we assume that we were going to have a single thread or single worker accessing the database at a given time because this makes a whole bunch of things a lot easier because

you're not worried about concurrency control issues of multiple threads coming in and touching the the data structure at the same time. So now in today's class we need to go sort of break that assumption and say okay well if you do have multiple workers accessing these data structures how are we we're going to protect them and it should sort of obvious why you want to do this because in in you know modern modern architectures the you know the clock speed of a single core is not really going up that much.

Instead you're getting a lot more cores and now in actually modern systems you get a variety of heterogeneous cores. We'll have some of like sort of performance ones and and low power ones that have different clock speeds and different performance capabilities. Nevertheless, we need to take care of of using all these these cores that are available to us because then that'll help us maximize the performance of the system. And as we see later on, we'll we'll be able to use these extra workers

or extra cores to hide disk stalls. It's like as you sort of did in project one, you could have one thread block while it was trying to go fetching some disc and then another thread can can can run and you know make use of the the the system and and still make forward progress. So pretty much what we're talking about today is how almost every single data system that's out there is is going to going to be implemented. There is a small subset of these systems that don't actually do any of the stuff that we're

talking about today and instead have what are called singlethreaded execution engines. Meaning they assume that there is one and only one thread accessing these data structures at any time. So therefore they can do all the stuff we were basically talking about before without bringing in the latching stuff that we'll talk about today. Most famous of these is Reddus, right? It's a single threaded execution engine that we there's only one thread can do anything in the system at any given time. There's

a fork of Reddus called Valky from Amazon because Reddus got a little frisky with their licensing. And so now there is actually multiple threads to handle networking. Uh and then you can hand that off to then a single threaded uh execution engine thread which still doesn't have the lashing stuff we're talking about here today. Um but the the basic idea is like again if you assume there if there's only one thread you don't have to worry about concurrency issues because nobody else could be

touching the data structure at the same time as you. So some systems do this you they do mostly do it for performance reasons and engineering reasons. it simplifies the the implementation. Um, but most of the systems we'll talk about in this class aren't going to do this. I just I just want to bring up to say these things do exist. So now the thing we need to introduce in our database system is what is called a concurrency control protocol. And you sort of think of this as like the the rules of the road, the traffic laws for

how workers can access parts of our system at the same time. And I'm using the term worker instead of a thread or or process because different systems will do different things like Postgress has multipprocess most other systems are multi-threaded but it's a high level concept is still the same. You'd want to protect these data structures using a concier protocol. The basic idea is that this is how the system is going to to guarantee that any changes that we're going to make to a shared object in our

system will be will be correct. And I'm putting the word correct in quotes here because it can mean different things to different parts of the system depending on who's doing what. So one notion of correctness will be logical correctness. And this just means that can I see the data that I should see? Like if I have a query that inserts record, you know, ABC, if I come back and try to read that ABC, should I be able to see it? Sometimes yes, right? And if somebody else deletes it, then sometimes no.

And so what that that terms of correctness we'll cover after the midterm um just have there's this notion of there's a higher level uh criteria we may want to use to determine whether something is actually correct or not. The thing that we care about in this lecture is physical correctness. Meaning the internal representation of whatever data structure we're using and manipulating in our system uh will be I'll use the term sound. Meaning if I if I follow a node in my B+ tree and has a

pointer to some other node, that pointer better go to actually what I expect it to go to it and not some random location in memory where I would have a seg fault or reads some part of the the the the you know some part of memory that I shouldn't be reading. So this is what we care about today. How to make sure that the data structure itself is correct even though the contents of the data structure may have a different notion of correctness like if I insert my record can I see my own record? Right? That

part we're not worrying about till later. This is like how do we make sure that the thing doesn't seg fault as we're flipping bits and going down inside of the data structure. So to do this we're first going provide some overview about what the latching mechanisms will look like. Uh we don't really care about how the low level details of how all these are actually implemented. We maybe don't care so much but at least be good to be aware of what actually going underneath the covers for

these things. We touch in advanced class more sophisticated implications uh but I'll just highlight some of them. Then we'll talk about how to do hasht l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l latching this is the most simp simplest protocol and how to make sure our hash table is is physically correct and then we'll spend a lot of time talking how to handle this in bust trees first we'll go with latching going from the top to the bottom and then we'll deal with doing

scans along the leaf nodes and then we'll finish up with announcement on on project two okay all right so I sort of alluded this early in the semester about this notion of locks and latches and the OS people are going to call what we call latches they're going to call them locks. The reason why we're not going to use the term locks for for latches and keep them separate is because these locks are going to represent higher level protection mechanisms for again for logical concepts or logical entities in

our in our database system. So locks are going to use to control transactions and think of a transaction as like a I I want to run multiple queries in my application and I want all those queries to be atomic. Okay, we'll cover this later in the semester. Uh but just think of like it's a high level thing where the application is trying to do multiple operations that has to define across multiple queries and we need to make sure those multiple queries occur in some in proper some proper ordering so

that we produce correct results and for this for transactions we're going to hold these locks for the length of the transaction typically uh if you care about uh strict correctness um and then the database itself is also responsible for rolling back any changes from queries that got executed on behalf of a transaction. If that transaction ends up having to abort, meaning if I insert 10 records and then I try to insert an 11th record and I violate some integrity constraint that's defined in

my table, then my transaction has to abort and the database system is responsible for rolling back any of those those first 10 things I inserted, not the application. So everything sort of happens transparently. Again, the details of this we'll worry about later. Just be aware that the the rollback mechanisms implemented by the system because we're dealing with crappy JavaScript code. We don't rely on people to do that roll back for us. We have to do everything ourselves. The thing we're talking about in this

class today is the latches. We're we're protecting the internal workers of the database system that again are manipulating the low-level data structures we're using to to to run our action system and store data. So the way to think of this is that we're we want to protect the critical sections of the various data structures we have using these latches. And because these are meant to be really fast operations like go and change some node then pop out right away that we're you're not going

to hold them for long periods of time. We're going to hold them for nanconds or microsconds in some cases. And because now these are all internal operations, um we want to be we we we're responsible for making sure that if we can't do something that we don't put the data structure in an invalid state or impartial state. That's actually mistakes do not need to roll back changes. We do need to roll back changes. um the the the worker itself responsible for keeping track of what

changes it made and then it's the one has to go and and roll back things. It can't do all everything that it wants to do. Yeah, that should be do need to roll back changes. So there's this great table from uh the book I mentioned before about from this guy G's graphy about modern B+3 techniques and he has this distinction between the locks and the latches and what they're actually used for. So way to sort of read this is going from the top to the bottom. You would say like latches are a a some kind of primitive

we're going to use to protect workers, threads or processes from the inary data structures. Uh during the critical sections and the only two modes we're going to have are read and writes whereas in in locks for transactions we'll have share we have these intention locks and shared locks higher level concepts. Again we'll worry about all that later. And the only way we're going to be able to handle deadlocks with latches is through coding discipline or and through avoidance. Meaning that

there isn't going to be some highlevel uh coordinator understanding what all the different threads are doing in these critical sections and said, "Oh, you got a deadlock. Let me go ahead and break it apart." Right? It's off it's up to us in our code to make sure we don't have deadlocks. And I'll say how show how we do that to avoid any problems because there isn't someone going to come along and and and fix it for us. Whereas in locks for transactions, if you have two

transactions try to acquire locks that the other guy holds, the database system is responsible for figuring out there's a deadlock and and go ahead in these killing killing transactions to free up free up the break the deadlock because again we're assuming the transactions are coming from queries from the outside world external to the system. It's some JavaScript program that that is poorly written, maybe doing bad things and it's our job to make sure that we we don't let them uh cause too many problems.

So again for for this class today we're worried about latches and therefore we have to do all of this when we talk about locks that'll be later in the semester when we talk about configure protocols uh in at a higher level in lecture 15. Okay. All right. So our latches since again there's these low-level uh protection pit primitives synchronization primitives only have two modes read mode and and write mode right and it should be sort of obvious if you take any OS class or systems class in read

mode you can allow multiple threads or workers to access uh whatever this critical section is you're trying to protect at the same time as long as they don't make any changes to it. So they can read the contents and be guaranteed that there won't be uh intermittent changes while this occurs, but it can't can't change anything. Write mode basically puts whatever the critical section in in is into single threaded mode because only one worker can hold a latch in right mode at any given time

and it's allowed to make any changes that it wants and it can guarantee that no other there's no other reader or writer uh thread or worker inside that critical section at at the same time. So the compatibility matrix is pretty simple, right? If I have a read latch and somebody else wants to acquire the read latch, those are compatible. You can you allow these to uh you allow the other thread to acquire that latch at the same time. But if at least one of the latches is a right latch, then

they're incompatible and you have to you deny the request for the for the other worker to acquire the latch. And then we'll talk about in a second what do we do when that request gets denied? like what should that worker do if it says I try to get a latch and I can't get it. So in our implementation of a latch we have sort of four main goals. We one want our latch to be have a small memory footprint. I think like in in bytes if possible uh because again we're going to store these now inside the data

structures that we're implementing like in every page for a B+ tree we're going to put our latches inside of that page. So we don't want this you know a 10 kilobyte data structure to maintain a latch uh inside of our page because it's it's space we could be using for storing keys and values right we want our latch to have a fast execution path when there's no contention meaning I don't have to go through a jump a bunch jump through a bunch of hoops in order to acquire a latch if nobody else is trying

to acquire that latch at the same time or nobody else holds the latch at the same time. I also want to make sure that that the management my latches is completely decentralized because again I don't want to have to build a centralized coordinator that's keeping track of all the different workers I have running my system and what latches they hold and what what they're doing because that's be really expensive for me to now to go update that information anytime I I want to acquire a latch. Think of like the

page table in your buffer pool, right? It's a centralized data structure that everyone has to go to in order to get pages and that be that that can become a hot spot in in our system. So that's why we want our latch management to be completely decentralized and we're going to store the latches inside directly inside our data structure at the different locations of the critical sections we want to protect. And last but not least, which goes again the major theme throughout the entire

semester, at all costs, we want to avoid having to talk to the operating system because as soon as you have to make a SIS call, now it's now going to the kernel. It's going into protective mode. It's a bunch of security mechanisms that has to make sure to make sure you're not doing malicious things. Going to the operating system is always going to be more expensive and ideally we want to do as much as we can in in user space. So if we can we we want to avoid SIS calls. So now everything I'm telling you here

seems reasonable. Again, if you come from a database systems perspective, like people actually building the actual system, we care about all of these things. You talk to the building operating systems and they think we're all idiots and they should not be doing any of these things. So this is a famous post from Lionus uh from the mailing list. This is what this is 2020 so five years ago. And he's making a he's he's he's banging on about people particular database people uh running their own latches which again he

calls spinbox. And he has this little blurb here that basically says, I repeat, do not use spin locks in user space, which is what we're going to do. Uh, unless you know actually know what you're doing and and be aware that the likelihood that you know what you're doing is basically no, right? He's wrong. We're right. Nobody in the right mind would do it the way he's proposing because you lose complete control over the the system if you have to go down to the operating system. We'll see why this

is going to happen in a second. So this is why most database systems will not do what he's proposing here and will not rely on the operating system to manage our latches. Again give me a few few more slides and I'll explain why this is the case. Right? So how can we implement our latches? So the most simple one is going to be a test and set spin lock. It's basically what Lionus is talking about and is what is actually is in the kernel uh now when you call P3 mutab. So that in a second.

Um but then we'll look at another mechanism using a blocking OS mutex. Um or say spin spin spin test and set spin lock is what Linus says not to use. He says use a blocking OS mutx. But we'll see what that looks like. And then we're going to talk about what a a reader writer lock is. Again, there's a bunch of more advanced techniques you can use. People have been researching this kind of stuff for a long long time. Um there's an adaptive spin lock from from Apple's parking lot a API or a library.

There's MCS locks. uh cubase spin locks. There's optimistic lock coupling that's used in some of the German systems. Um the I think the latest the the latest number says there's one called uh Cosmopolitan that uses a library from Google called NSync and with the letter N sync that has a bunch of its own internal synchronization primitives. Some of them rely on the OS stuff. Some of them relies on the uh and usually it's based off but in general you don't want to have to write this yourself.

there's existing libraries you want to use again like the one from from Apple and then this is this is a blog article from almost a decade ago from a you know a locking library for now world a latching library that they built for uh for I think for the uh what is their Safari browser uh but they had this little micro benchmark here just showing how in some workloads you know you can get about a 10 10 to 5% uh improvement over you know the standard template library threads Right. And the data and and the the

metadata they're maintaining per latch is much smaller than it would be using again pthread mutex. All right. So the most simple lock or sorry most simple latch you can write is called a test spin latch or test set spin lock. Um this is very very efficient because you only need to store maybe eight bits to keep track of something uh you know keep track of the latch. The pal challenge though it's not going to be very scalable and certainly not cache friendly because our thread is just spinning on uh trying to acquire

this latch and over and over again and the OS is going to think oh you're doing useful work let me keep scheduling you but in actuality you're kind you're just burning cycles but in some cases this is okay some cases this is not okay so a realist implementation will look like this so in C++ we can we we can use the center template array we have this atomic flag uh this is just an alias for the atomic boolean and it has a really simple API where if I want to acquire the latch assuming if it's if it's currently set

then when I call a test and set try to set it to true it's going to return uh it'll return true because I haven't set it yet. Uh and so I'll just spin this loop over and over again until I I can then set it to true in which case it comes back as false because that was the previous value and then I b pop out of this this while loop. So it's basically me trying to acquire a latch and I'm just going to spin this while loop infinitely until I can actually get it. So you can be a little more

sophisticated inside your while loop. You can say like, oh, I've tried 10 times, so let me let me yield to the OS, deschedu my thread, and then that way if I come back, maybe it'll be available. I could kill myself after a certain amount of time if I can't acquire it. But there's some there's some intelligence you can put in here, but the end of the day, the the the implementation is pretty basic. So the reason why this is not going to be so great is one I've already said is

that you we're burning cycles here uh because the technically we're doing work. We're just not doing useful work in our database system and the the OS doesn't know that. The other challenge is going to be in non-uniform memory architectures or NUMA architectures. Think of like a multi multi multiCPU socket machine. Each of those sockets is going to have its own local DRM. So if the latch I want to acquire is over this DRAM here, then this thread or this worker running on this CPU is basically spinning and

trying to read this memory address over and over again. And because this memory is on another another node inside or socket in my CPU, I got to go over this interconnect between the different sock sockets and that's much slower than reading like local local DRAM or local uh L3 cache. So in a multiCPU architecture, this is actually terrible if you just do this incessantly. Does everybody know how test and set works? I'm getting no. Okay, so test and set compare and swap. The idea is pretty

basic. It's a specialized CPU instruction. It's been around I think since since the 80s uh that allows you to do to check the the value of some memory address and if it's a value you expect it to be then you're allowed to update it and change it to a new value and you can do this atomically so you're not worried about like you know think of like if you had to do like if the value equals this then change it right if you just write that C code someone could come in between the the if check and

then the the update and modify the thing before you get to it right So with a compare and swap instruction or test and set instruction, it allows you to do all of that atomically and you know that no one no one's going to squeak in and change something before you do. So this is a really simple notation uh to do a parent swap on a single memory address. So this this is for this is for GCC running on x86. Anytime you see like a double underscore in front of a function name in in C++ or C, it's called an

intrinsic. Think of like a macro for the actual assembly instructions that'll that'll do this for you. Right. So it sort of fits in it sort of looks more natural like C code uh but underneath the cover that the compiler just converts this to assembly to do exactly the the assembly that does this. All right. So here we're going to we're going to pass in the memory address. We have the compare value. Then we want to check to see whether this current value is the is set to some some what we

expect it to be. And if it is in this case here we check to see whether it's 20. And since it is 20 then within again the same instruction we can then change it to 30. So this again this guarantees that nobody else can squeak in before we do after we do the check that that that it's 20 and change to some value uh before we do. So so this is the basic primitive that all these latching schemes are going to use that we can then build upon and do more sophisticated things. All right. So we talked about the issues

with the the spin latch. Um the what lions would say for you to use is a blocking OS mutx and this is what you get basically with uh sedd mutx. Um and so the way it basically works is you declare mutx you call lock on it do something in your critical section and then when you're done with it you can call unlock right the guards are basically doing the same thing when they fall out of scope then then the lock gets released. So on Linux if you call std mutex what do you actually get? P thread mutx. Exactly right. What is a

P thread mutex? How is that actually implemented? >> You have a fast he says there's a fast path that's a spin lock and then >> so what is that called? >> Uh close fast user mutx. So he's right. So you have a a futex is actually two d two data structures. You have a user space latch which is just the spin latch I just showed in the last slide where you just try to conditionally try to set something with an atomic compare and swap. But then if you can't acquire it

then you fall back down to the OS and try to acquire a latch on inside the the operating system. And then if you can't acquire that latch the OS is going to schedule you uh in its own internal schedule table and make sure that and only notify you through a conditional variable when this thing actually becomes available. So think it like this. So I have my two two workers. They both are trying to acquire this. The first thing then they try to acquire is the user space latch. The the first guy

gets it. The second guy can't get it. So then it falls down to the OS latch and then it goes to sleep because the OS says like you can't run until this latch gets available. Then when it becomes available, it notifies it and it wakes it up. So this is what Linus wants you to do. I've already said why it's a bad idea because again you're going going down to the OS. It's a SIS call. That sucks. There's one more thing reason why this sucks. How is the OS figuring out or

maintaining the metadata or keeping track of what threads it has to should be desc and what threads are waiting for this data structure? It has its own hash table down there. How is it protecting that? It has its own latches, right? So, in order for me to acquire this latch, I had to first try to acquire the first one. I can't get that. Then I have to go down now into the the the the scheduling table acquire latches inside of that data structure and then put myself to sleep inside that and then

the OS has to then kick up you know the schedule up the things available and you start running. So this is way more expensive to do because again we're relying on the OS mechanisms and the OS has to protect its own data structures or we just want something more simple uh that protect ourselves and the memory location for these things uh or the future text that'll sit in user space but the OS has it own data structures that's somewhere else in kernel memory and and now we're jumping around to

different parts of memory where if you keep everything code located together that's going to be much faster for our workers to rip through for modern CPUs. So a more uh sophisticated thing you can build on top of this. Again, these two latches just have basically one mode. It's either write mode or read mode. Um if you want to be sophisticated and have what are called a reader writer latches, this allows us to have multiple concurrent readers uh access the critical section at the same time. And

then when a writer thread or writer worker shows up, it converts the the latch to write mode and that blocks everything else out. So this is what you get using uh standard shared mutx and this is just a wrapper or an alias on Linux for pthread uh readwrite lock and then this is just a combination of a pthread mutex and a pthread conditional variable. So the way it basically works is that your latch now has has a modem my read mode or write mode and then it has a queue for uh or counter the number

of threads that are accessing the the critical section holding the latch in this given mode at a given time and then a counter for the number of threads that are waiting to acquire it. So if the first worker shows up wants to do a read on the data structure the critical session acquires the latch in read mode we just update the counter uh by one and then the thread can do whatever it wants. Another thread comes along, tries to try to acquire the ratchet in read mode. We're already in read mode. So we

can allow this. We give it the latch, set the mode to two or set the counter to two. So then now if this worker shows up, wants to acquire the latch in right mode, it would it would look in the counter and see that the the read counter is set to two or greater than zero. So it can acquire the latch in right mode because we don't want it going inside the critical section and start mcking around and changing changing bits or bytes to to pointers or whatever because these guys are reading it and and not expecting it to change

underneath them. So this thread has to pause and wait and then from fairness when the next thread comes along uh that wants to cry the latch in read in read mode since we know that this guy is waiting for it we don't want to starve him out. So therefore, we're gonna we're gonna let that thread now go to sleep and wait to try the latch or either spin or sleep in the OS. And then at some point when the two readers are done, the the latch will switch switch to write mode and then the next thread can start

running. So this is a bit more sophisticated because now we have to maintain these data structures and these counters instead of saying like you know now we're sort of making this latch larger and larger. Still it's not too bad for this uh if we rely on the OS mechanisms for some things. Um but this this can be actually you know if we have to store this now for every single record you know every single tupole then this can start to add up and be kind of expensive. >> Yes. >> Yes.

His question is the question is why does the OSP not want us to use spin locks in user space >> because it like from his perspective he's at the operating system he they're seeing a bunch of threads and they they want to try to maximize amount of useful work being done but if my thread is spinning on the spin lock or spin trying to acquire it I'm not really doing any useful work I'm just trying to get and get and get over and over again I can't get it so from from the OS perspective

the thread looks like it's doing something because it's executing instructions, but it's not actually doing any useful work. So in the OS world, they would say, well, you're not you can't do anything now, so let me actually describe. And all I'm saying is if I go back to um all I'm saying is the database people, we can be smarter about this middle part here. I can't acquire the latch. do something and we're not talking about co- routines we're not talking about different other

architectures but like you can imagine in some systems where I try to acquire the latch I can't get it but I'm do I'm using uh uh nonpreceptive uh scheduling where I say all right I can't get this latch let me go yield the co- routine goes back and the thread can then be handled off to some other co- routine to process work right I can't do that if I'm using the OS mutex because as soon as I try to acquire the latch and I don't get it, I'm going to fall down to the kernel and my thread gets scheduled

or descheduled. Whereas if I implement my data system correctly, then I can say I can't get it and I know that the the thing I'm trying to get may take a long time. You can't always know that, but you can say all right, let me go back and let my thread be used for something else. Other questions? question. What's a good option? So again, I don't want to go too much deep in the details, but the this thing from the from the parking lot stuff, do I may have a slide on it. Um, yeah, I don't have slides here. Um, in

in this class, MCS is probably a little bit better. Um, basically this thing maintains a link list and you can keep track of like um like you're not everyone's not waiting for the same lock. You can kind of put yourself in a queue. This is actually what Linux uses on on the inside which you can then do something better in user space. the parking lot one from Apple they maintain their own like worker pools to keep track of like I this worker can't do anything but so in some cases the thing it's waiting for

I know it's not going to be available for a long time so let me actually go yield it back to the OS but other ones might be like a hot pool like I I think I need I think I'm gonna get it back right away so don't like go to sleep there's a bit more logic in there that they're doing the MCS1 is is is a another implication to minimize the um yeah this this is what the the out spin lock is from the parking lot one but I don't I don't want to I don't other than the description here I don't have other

slides on it show demonstrations of it okay all right so we now basically we know how to do basic latching again the exact implementation for for what we'll talk about going forward doesn't matter whether we yield to the US or not again it's still about the We're trying to maintain the physical correctness of the data structure. So the first one I want to talk about is hash table latching because this one is again it's much more simple than the B+ trees because all the threads are going to be going in

the same direction. Right? Think of like when I was doing linear probe hashing. I hash my key. I landed some somewhere in the hash table and I always scan going down to try to find the key that I want. And therefore I can't have deadlocks because I don't I'm not worried about somebody else coming from the bottom going up. and I I need their latch and they need my lash and get blocked. So in this case here, this is going to be a lot easier to do because we're always going in the same direction. Now, if we

have to resize the hash table, that's a bit more tricky. Uh and so the simplest way to do this, you just maintain a a latch for the entire data structure. Uh and so anytime you do a read, uh anytime you want to do a read or write into it, it requires a latch for this. And then if you want if you want to swap out the hashing while resizing it, just take a a right latch on the entire thing and that prevents anybody from coming along and reading it. But again, we can ignore that. But there's basically three

approaches. The first one is as I already said like use a global latch that protects the entire data structure. Problem with this again it's it's be simple and implement but now it's basically making my data structure be single threaded. All right. The next could be I have the scope of the latch protect the page or block within my hash table. And that means anytime before I go look inside a a page, I acquire the latch for it in whatever mode that I want. And then before I go down, if I

can't find the thing that I want or a free slot to put some data in before I go to the next next page, I release that latch on my page that I'm at right now and then try to acquire it on the next one. And then the alternative is to have more fine grain latches where every single slot in a page will have its own latch. Again, this think something I'm embedding inside of the header, right? And so the advantage of this is that it's going to be since they're more fine grain, I could have in in theory

two different threads touching different parts of the same page. Uh and that's okay because they're the latches are, you know, at a slot level. Whereas if I have a page latch, then only one thread can do something make a modification to a page at a time. So let's look at a real simple example here. We have our hash table. All right. First we'll do the the the page based locks or block based locks or latches. So I'm going to find D. So again ignoring whatever sort of global latch I

have to protect things or resizing assume that's already taken care of. I'm going to land in uh this page here. So before I can start reading the contents, after I hash it and figure out what page I need to read, I I have to put this latch in in read mode. And since there's no other threads right now, I can go ahead and do that. Now my thread can jump inside the page and actually start reading the contents of of the slots to figure out whether the key D is is there. But then at the same

time, T2 comes along, another thread, and it wants to find E or sorry, insert E, and saying it's going to hatch to this location here. So it wants to put the latch the the the page latch into write mode but it can't because the first thread holds it in read mode. So it has to stall and has to wait. T1 then can resume start keep scanning along. And then when it jumps to this next page here, since we know the d the data structure can't be resized or linear program, we're not doing hashing or

linear hashing, then I can go ahead and actually release the latch on the the page one uh in the middle here before I get the latch on on page two. Right? Because again, I I I know that the I know the sequence of the pages I need to access that isn't going to get moved around because I'm not going to re reorder reorder them. So then now I get the read latch on on page two. The other thread can then wake up and now get the right latch on page one. Look, scan all the slots. See that it can't insert either way it wants. So it

has to go down here. And then the same thing since the first thread holds the read latch on the page. This guy has to wait. The second one has to wait. When then when T1 is done releases the read latch, T2 can then acquire the right latch and then go ahead and make and make its change there. Right. So, this is page page logs. See how like even though one was trying to do a read, one trying to do a write, and they're looking at different things, I had to the second thread had to wait until the first thread finished reading

or accessing whatever it was accessing. If I have a slot per latch, then if I try to do that same operation I had before, when T1 hashes into the hash table, lands on the first uh slot here, it takes the read latch on it, goes doesn't, you know, inspects the contents, T2 comes along, it hashes into the same thing, and now it's going to take the right latch on on this because you don't know whether it's empty until you actually read it. Uh, so you take the right latch. Then now when T T1

scans along because it's trying to find D, it tries to get to to the next slot, but that the f the second thread holds the right latch on that. So it has it has to wait until that latch is released. So it stalls. T2 comes along, scans along, takes the right latch on on the next page. Then at this point here, T1 can take the read latch on on that slot, doesn't find what it wants, scans along, has to wait for this guy to finish. This guy comes down here, says this this slot is empty. Let me go ahead and insert E. And then at

the same time, D can then do a read on on the slot to find the thing that it wants. >> The question is what? Sorry. >> Statement is um in this case here, wouldn't you have to take a a latch on the page itself? As soon as it's backed by disk because you want to mark the the Yeah, dirty bit. True. Yeah. So, and for this one, what I'm assuming it's in memory, but yes, if it was a >> No, because if I'm not writing about the disc, I don't care if it's dirty. If if

if it's not backed by like the buffer pool manager, I don't there's no no concept of a dirty page. It's just it's just memory, right? But in in the thing you're proposing, yes, you'd have to uh that one you you could take the you could do the update on the dirty bit uh on the dirty flag after the the changes you made. You still want to pin it so it doesn't get swapped out, right? But you don't have to take the patch the the lash on the whole page if you have different parts reading it because then

you just go flip the bit because the the first thread here it doesn't care whether the page is marked dirty. I care that it stays in memory so it's pinned. That's fine. But then setting that flag says I'm not the only the buffer manager is the only one reading it. The different threads accessing it don't need to do that atomically. >> Yes. >> How much slot? >> The question is how much how much performance benefit do you get from having uh slot latches versus page

latches? I mean the classic storage versus compute right? If my key value pairs are not that big, then I'm going to have a lot of key values within a page, but everyone now is going to have its own memory location to keep track of the latches, right? And so I'm going to maximize concurrency. Again, it's a copout. It depends on the workload, depends on how fast you're, you know, how many cores you have, what they're actually trying to do, right? So it could be a huge benefit, it could be a

small benefit. Depends on what the workload actually is. But >> his question statement is the statement is it it depends on how how large each entry is, how large each slot is relative to the size of the latch. >> Same thing, right? So if if the the key values are really small, your latches your latches always be fixed size. So if the key value is really really small, then the size of the key value could be the same as the latch. So, you're basically storing double the space to store this latch information. So, is

that a good trade-off? I mean, again, it depends. There isn't there's So, I'm not trying to like I'm not trying to be evasive, but there isn't a number I can give you and say, "Oh, it's always going to be 10x." It depends. All right. Latching for hash table is pretty straightforward. The good stuff comes along when we start doing latching for B+ trees, right? Again, so the idea is the same. We want to have multiple threads. We got to read and write to our Bless Street at the

same time. And we have to protect the problem where we have two workers trying to modify the the node at the same time. And then we have a the other problem is we have nodes or workers traversing our data structure at the same time. We're doing splits and merges because then now we could have pointers going to to nowhere and we could get a seg right. The statement is the question is when I'm talking about B+3 and hashable latching is it using one of the latching implementations I showed before? Yes.

But it doesn't matter for like we just have this notion of a protection mechanism that we we can protect a critical section. So whether it's spin latches, OS mutexes, parking lot thing, doesn't matter. All right. So here's what we're trying to trying to avoid. So we say we have our B+ here and we had this key 44 we want to do do a delete on. So when the thread starts, you know, does the scan, looks at the guide post, figures out where to go, traverses down to the bottom, gets to this leave node, and

voila, there's key44 that it wants to wants to go ahead and delete. So it goes ahead and deletes that. But now we have the problem where the node is less than half full. So we got to rebalance means we have to do a merge. But then say uh and say for this here we want to move 41 over that'll keep us balanced. And then say for whatever reason the thread gets this worker gets descheduled by the OS there's a pause something right doesn't matter. And then while it's paused asleep the other

thread comes along and now wants to find 41 does the same thing. scans along, finds the guidepost, comes along down here to D, looks at the at the the keys inside there, figures out needs to follow this pointer to get to this node here. But let's say now for whatever reason the OSD schedules this thread and it goes to sleep. The first guy wakes up then moves the does the rebalancing, moves moves key 41 from H to I, then it's done. The second thread then comes back awake, follows that pointer that I thought was correct

before, gets down here, and now it sees that the key that I thought was going to be there is no longer there. So this this is what we're we're trying to avoid, right? This is a best case scenario because this this will get us a false negative. It's better than following a pointer to takes to to a bad memory location. We get a seg fault, right? But still, this is still bad because if if it's your bank account and we can't find it and you're losing money, you would get pissed.

So the way we're going to to to avoid this problem is through a technique called latch coupling or sometimes called latch crabbing. I think the textbook calls it latch coupling. Wikipedia calls it latch coupling but sometimes you'll see old order references called latch crabbing. And this is the protocol we're going to use in our pustry implementation that's going to allow multiple threads to access safely access the the data structure at at the same time. And the basic idea is that as we do our

traversals for either an a modifi modifying or read operation, a right read or write, we're always going to acquire a latch for some parent or the root node that we start out with. Then acquire the latch for the child that we need to go we need to go down to next. And then if the if we know that based on whatever operation that we're trying to do that the the the child is not going to have to do a split or a merge then the the parent is is deemed as safe and we can go ahead and release release the latch for anything

we hold up above in the tree. And the reason why it's called latch crabbing is supposed to be like uh the way crab would walk right it moves it one leg after another right. So again, we're define a safe node is that we know that the based on what operation we're trying to do that if we want to do an insert that we know it's not full and therefore we're going to have to do a split if we you know if if we have to handle keys coming up and then if we're doing delete that we know it's at least

more than half full that we're not have to do a merge if we have start deleting things below us. So the basic protocol is again for for a for a search or lookup or get acquire read latches all the way down. Uh and once we reach a child node it's you know in taking that latch in read mode. We can then release its parent in in read mode. Do that till we reach the leaf node read whatever we want and and we're done. For inserts and deletes we start with taking right latches on the way down. Again, as we go down from from a

parent to a child, we check whether the child will have to split or merge based on whatever the operation we're going to do uh or it's that it could have to do this because we may not know what comes below us in the in the tree. And if we know it's safe, we can go ahead and release the latch for our parent and actually any other latches we hold going back up to the root, right? And then once we reach the leaf node, we do whatever it is that that we need to do. So the idea is that we don't release our

latches as soon as possible because we want to let other threads or other workers run in in our system. Yes. >> His statement is uh I keep saying we want to put things in right mode. If we're if we're doing updates, don't we do everything in read mode and then upgrade. Few more slides. Yes. This is the basic protocol. All right. So let's see if I want to do a find on key 38. And so I started hit the always got to start at the root node. I put this in read mode. I come down down to to B

acquire B in read mode, right? Because again going back here like I know that these pointers are all going to be correct at this point because I have it in read mode. So I know nobody else is going to swap them out and change it to something else because because you can't do that in read mode. So it's safe for me to follow this pointer. I land land down here. Put this page or this node in read mode. And at this point, I know it's safe to release A, the latch on A because I'm at B and I hold B's latch.

So, I go ahead and do that. Do the same thing. Scan down to D, put that in read mode to release the latch on B. Scan down to H. Uh, to put that in read mode, and release the latch on on D. Read what I want, and then I'm done. So, this is pretty simple. Let's see where we have to do a delete. start off with putting the the the the parent in right mode because again at this point here I don't know what's below me in the tree. So I don't know whether if I delete a key I'm going to

have to do a merge and I might have to reorganize all the way up to the root. So I maintain the the right latch on A come down to B. Same thing here. I don't know whether I'm going to have to do uh a merge on B because it's only got one key and I can only store two keys. So if I had to delete something and I delete the the the the key here, I got to do a merge. So I have to hold the right latch for this and right latch on A. But then when I get down to D taking that latch and read right mode, at this

point here, I know that even if I delete a key below me that then gets ends up deleting a key in D. Since I I'll be at least half full, I know I can absorb that that delete in D. So therefore, I don't need the latch on on A and B above me. So it's safe for me to go ahead and delete those latches. What order do we do? We want to release them, right? Going back here, do I want to release A then B or B then A? >> Why? He says A then B then why? there's just no reason. >> He said what he said is he's correct is

that there's no nothing in the game by by releasing B first because implicitly the the latch on B is being held by the latch on A. So I actually want to release A first because if someone wants to go down to the other side of of the of the tree, they can't do that if I'm holding the latch on it. So if I release A first and that sort of frees up that whole other side and I want to do that before I I release on on B. So I I want to release latches from top down sort of roughly in the same same order

that I'm I'm acquiring them uh going going top down. Yes. >> Yeah. So his statement is and he's correct that the order in which we release them doesn't affect correctness. This is this is a performance optimization because again if I release the latch on B, nobody can do anything. Nobody can get to B anyway because I still hold the latch on its parent on A. So I want to release the most sort of the the latch that has the sort of largest scope or most compassing the most part of the

tree sooner rather than later. Again, we're talking nanconds here, but again, we'll take anything we can get. All right, so now I get down to here. Uh, again, same thing. I know that H can absorb the delete without rebalancing time to do merge. So, it's safe for me to release the latch on D. I do my delete and I'm done. All right, let's look at another approach where we we do have to do a modification to the structure of the tree. So, I'm going to do an insert on uh 40, key 45, take the right latch on

A, scan down, get the right latch on B. Again, at this point, I know that if I do a split and a key comes up into B, then B can handle it. B has a space for it. So, I release the latch on A. I get down here to D, D isn't going to have enough room for it. So, I got to keep the latch up on B. Then, I get down to the bottom and then at I, then I see I can do an insert there. So I can release the latch on B and D and I go ahead then I'll insert my new key and then I'm done. All right, last example. Do insert with

that is going to require us to do modification. I insert 25. Same thing. Take the latch on A. Go down to B. Take the latch on on B. B can insert can absorb any new key that comes up. So I can release the latch on A. Follow B down. I go to C. C can do the same thing. Can absorb any new new uh insert that could happen. So I can release the latch on B. Then I get down to F. I see that F is going to have to do a split now because there's no there's no room for this. So I hold maintain the latch I

have on C. That's that's its parent. And again, if I put a new key into C, that's not going to get pushed anything push anything up to to B. So that's why I don't need to maintain the latch on it. So again, now I'll I'll create a new node, move my keys around as needed, update the guide post up above in C, and point to the to to the new page I just created here, which again I can do because I hold the right latch on on C. And then now insert my new record and I'm I'm and I'm done

in the back. Yes. >> Save it is. And we'll get we'll get in a second. The question is if I have to if since I have these pointers along the leaf nodes, do I have to take latches on the siblings uh in order to update them? So in this example here, I wouldn't when I'm at this point here, right? So for for node C, its siblings are E and F. I implicitly have the latch on E because I have the latch on C. So nobody can get to it. We'll talk about leaf node scans in in a few more slides. But to your

point, yes, if I'm here and now I have to update G because this guy is now the new sibling, I will have to keep scanning across this, not go back up and just scan leaf nodes and update G. Now point back to J. I'll I'll show how to do that in a second. All right. So for all my examples, what's the very first thing I did anytime I want to update the data structure? He sort of alluded to this before. What's the very first thing you always have to do in order to make a change to to a B+ tree?

>> Exactly. Take take a right latch. >> Right latch on the route. Right. Even though again in some of these operations like for the inserts even if a key came up I would have to you know I I could uh a had an extra free you know slot for it I could could insert something into it. So this is basically making our uh our our data structure singlethreaded because everybody's coming in and trying to do the same thing trying to take a right latch on the on the route and that'll become a

bottleneck for us. So the optimization uh that we can do to this, so what he alluded to is instead of taking a right latch because we're going to assume that we may have to do a split and merge, we're going to be optimistic and assume that we're not going to have to split and merge and therefore we're going to take read latches all the way down until we reach the uh to till we reach a uh a leaf node. And then we check to see whether our assumption was correct or not, whether we are going to do a split merge based

on our operation. And if we're if we were correct that we're not going to do split merge, then we just take the right latch on on the leaf node. Poof, we're done changes just fine. If we are incorrect about our assumption, then we release any latches that we have, just do the traversal again, taking right latches in the more pessimistic approach. So this technique was uh sometimes called the bearer slotnik algorithm. Bayer was the guy that invented the B+ tree with the other guy from CMU at Boeing in the 19 early

1970s or 1960s. Right? So this is an optimistic algorithm that they developed uh a few years later. And we'll see this idea again when we talk about optimistic control which is another technique invented here at CMU in the 1980s of how we handle transactions where again you assume that things are not going to conflict and therefore you do sort of the fast path and then if you get it wrong you go back and you clean things up. Question. Yes. Is there >> the question is uh is there a upgrade

mechanism in latches where you can uh if you hold a right a read latch upgrade it to a right latch if you don't know who the other threads are and whether how many other threads are have it in in in read mode. No. >> If you know there's nobody else holding it in in in read mode right now, you could do that. Yes. I see. So there's no like atomic way to like wait until all others like reading threads have finished. >> So there's no there's no you use the word atomic for that, but I don't think

you mean that. So there's there's no way to just wait until all the other threads that have it in read mode finish. So again, if you have a counter for a number of threads currently hold it in read mode, you could do that sort of Q lock thing we before where like you put yourself in a queue and say, "Okay, I actually want this in right mode now." And then when that's free that you go ahead and get it. You could do that, but that's it's it's more machinery. >> It may not be worth it.

start. >> So, >> so let me come back to your question. He's basically asking, do I always have to start from the rooe again? Can I just start halfway through or he's saying doing a lock a latch upgrade? You're saying do what? Do same thing or >> Yeah, let's go through example. It may work but like the point of main change and that's that's the tricky part. It depends on whether you still hold the read latch or not. All right. So search the same before insert delete again you take you treat

it as if you're doing a a search take latches and once you get to the the level right above the leaf node because again you you maintain in every node what level you're at. So you know the height of the tree. So you know when you're when your your height minus one um then you try to acquire the the right latch on that that leaf node if you get it wrong when you actually then inspect it to see whether you do a split merge then you just restart and take take right right latches all the way down and

in some cases as you said you may be able to not have to do the full traversal uh but it's a bit more complicated. So going back here, the same example we had before. I want to delete key 38. So instead of taking the right latch in the route, I'm going to take the read latch, go all the way down, just do the the latch coupling technique as we as we did before, right? Releasing the latch on my parent once I acquired the latch below me. I now get the right latch on H. At this point here, I know that this node can can

absorb a deleted key. So I can go ahead and release the read latch above me in D. Make my change to the H at the bottom. And I know it can absorb that. And we're not going to do a merge. So we're we're fine there. All right. In my example here, when I I have to do uh delete insert 25. Same thing. Start start at the root, scan down, taking the read latches as I go along, and releasing up above me when I know it's safe. Then I get the the right latch on this guy here. See that I am going to

have to do a split on node F. So in this case here, I'll just have to restart my search taking right latches all the way down. So now his comment is, could I be clever about this and keep track of the nodes I visited, figure out where where would I where could a a split or where could a new key come up or I had to do a split up above. You could do that. The challenge is that there's no guarantee by the time you get here since you release all the relatches up above you that if I then try to come

back and say oh I was at B and I know B could absorb anything that came up from C uh or sorry C can absorb anything that comes up from from F. Therefore I don't have to acquire read latches on B. But you don't know whether somebody else has come along by the time you you restarted changed B's layout and now C is somewhere else. So you could do it. It's it's just more tricky because there's no guarantee because otherwise you're just holding latches on everything and then it

defeats the whole purpose of any of this. Often times the simplest thing is the easiest thing to do or the best thing to do. All right. So now let's get to the the the last problem that he brought up in the back where in all my examples here I was just doing like point query lookups. Go insert this one key. Go find this one key. But when I have to start doing range scans along leaf nodes, then this becomes more tricky because assuming I have now sibling pointers that can go both directions. Now I can have

deadlocks. Again, in the hashep I'm going from top to the bottom. In the in the in the B+ coupling, I'm going from from the bottom top to the bottom. Nobody else is coming up in the other direction. I can't have a deadlock. But now if I have leaf node scans, I could have this problem because people might be coming from different directions. So now we may come to a possibility where I need to acquire a latch on the next node I want to scan along and somebody else holds it and now I got to

figure out what I what do I need to do. So say my first thread here wants to find all keys greater than four. Again I start at the leaf the root node. It's a really simple B+ tree. Only has two levels. I take this one in read mode. I scan along down here. take this uh node C in read mode and I'm fine because I can find all the data that I want. But now when I want to come along here and go from C to B because I'm scanning all values less than four, right? I don't want to release the latch on C until I

acquire the latch on B because I don't know whether this thing will get swapped out by the time I'm following the pointer to B. Right? Right? Because if I release the latch on on C, some other thread might come in, do a do an update, and now the the location of where C should be and what it's pointing to or where B is now as well could change. And then I could have, you know, invalid memory access follow a bad pointer. So once I know it's safe, I can get over to B, then I can go ahead and release the

the latch I have on C. Right? So look at another one. Final key is greater than than than one. So now I have the blue thread wants to go down to to from the root node to B and the red thread wants to go down from from A to C. So they both acquire the read latch on on the route. That's fine. Then they get down to their uh their leaf nodes. Now they're scanning along. They read all the data that they want. And then they want to swap sides because because the red thread wants to go over to B and

the blue thread wants to go over to C. In this case here, both nodes are in latched in read mode. So those are commutive. So it's okay for both of them to to share the share these latches. So they just sort of swap sides and read the data they want. And that's just fine. And then at this point here, uh they're both releasing the latches that are being held that they're holding on the other nodes. So at this final stage here, only uh T1 holds the read latch on B and only T2 holds the read latch on C.

Right? That's pretty straightforward. So now let's look at how the case we have modification. T1 wants to delete key4 and T2 wants to find all keys greater than one. So in the very beginning they're they're assuming doing optimistic latch coupling. So they're going to both acquire the root node in uh in the latch on the root node in in read mode. That's fine. That's commutative. T2 comes down here to B gets the read latch on B. T1 gets then the right latch on on C and wants to go ahead and

because it wants to delete that key right there. So let's say that T2 reads all it wants from B and now wants to follow the sibling pointer to come over and read the contents on C. And so again, we know it's doing a read operation. So it wants acquired the latch on C in read mode, but it's already being held in write mode. That's not compatible. So it can acquire that latch. So now the question is what should happen here? Because T2 doesn't know what T1 is doing. T1 doesn't know that there's

another thread trying to acquire the latch because it acquired, you know, it acquired the latch in right mode. It's off doing whatever the right that it wants to do. It's not checking to see who else is waiting for it because that would be slow. Why would you do that? So T2 all it knows is that there's some other thread that holds this latch in in right mode that it's not compatible with it want with what what you know with what it wants to do. So now we have to make a decision of what we want to do

with T2. So there's three choices. One is you can just wait. Two you can just kill yourself right whatever latches you have and then just try it again. And then three is you kill the other thread, right? Take its latch, steal it car keys, whatever you want, and then do whatever it is that you want to do. >> What's that? >> The statement is you can't just wait. >> No, it's not a deadlock >> because because this No, T1 only wants to delete T uh four. It's not going to

require any latches on B. It's not a deadlock. the statement as the question is how would how would T2 know that it would find what it needs on in that other node. >> Yeah. The question is is it possible that the pointer on uh that where where the location of C would >> no so so statement is is it possible where the say the physical location of C would change therefore that the pointer on B would no longer be valid no because I wouldn't be allowed to change that location without updating all the the

sibling pointers and if I can't acquire the the the the the latch on B then I can't make that change. >> Okay. So in this case you don't need to update around but it's like >> very clear we say so T1 since it's only deleting that one key it doesn't have to update any sibling pointers >> because it's not doing a merge. >> Okay. wanted another case it does and it tries to acquire. >> Yep. Sure. >> Yes. In that case, you would have a deadlock. Yes.

>> Yeah. >> That's not this example. >> And the protocol, the answer to this will roughly be the same. >> Say it again. does not know. >> T2 does not know that indela. Correct. >> And it actually would never know. >> It says the option is is to wait. Okay. How long? >> What's that? >> All right. So, you said uh T1 would have to adjust it. T2 would adjust its speed or not going to be doing, right? >> Yes. >> Okay. So, so he said T2 should

optimistically keep waiting until it acquires the latch. My question would be how long >> cannot do. We're not trying to do deadlock here. All we know here is T2 wants to acquire the latch on on C. T1 holds that. >> Try again later. >> Said just kill itself and try try again later. Do you think it's a good idea? All raise your hand. You say you should wait. All right. Less than half. Ra raise your hand if you want to kill yourself. All right. You want to kill your thread.

If you're the thread, you're going to kill yourself. Sorry. Raise your hand if you want to kill yourself. Ra raise your hand if you want to kill the other thread. Nobody wants to kill the other thread. Oh, you do. Gangster, how would you do it >> with that? >> Not sure. >> Not sure. Can we do it? >> David is uh it'd be hard to know which latch is being held by which thread. Yes. some sort of old table that table latch. >> Yes, remember we said before there is no

centralized data structure keeping track of what thread holds what latch. So I so all I know is that there's this latch I want. So all T2 knows is that there's some latch I want. It's being held by this other thread. I can't talk to it. All right. So then maybe I could store within the within the latch the list of the threads that hold it. But then how am I going to you kill them, right? Well, if you used Pthread mutex uh and you send an interrupt, it wants to kill the whole thread. The thread

wants to terminate some of the use latches we talked about before. You can set interrupts and just kill the weight operation. That's more fine grain. That's what you want to do. But like if I want to basically you know I'd have to have a mechanism where I'm checking to see hey whether your T1 would have to check to say oh yeah somebody wants this latch and I'm holding I should kill myself. But again if I'm trying to do this as quickly as get in a critical section quickly as possible and release

it. Not always the case. If if I have to go something from disc yeah I'm screwed because that's going to take milliseconds. But in general if I assume that everything's in memory I be fast as possible. I want to be in and out as quickly as I can. Because again, you can't you can't just blindly kill the thread uh like you know send a sig term because it's in your thread. It'll take take down everything. But like because if if I have a large my data structure much larger I may hold a

bunch of latches up above and I got to unwind all that. Furthermore, I may have made a bunch of modifications in my data structure and I just want to I can't just shoot it in the head and let it let it die. it has to roll back all its changes because again I said there isn't this centralized thing that's going to keep track of what changes I made every thread is responsible for cleaning itself up uh if it can't do what it needs to do when when it rolls back. So the correct answer is kill ourselves.

We can be a little more you know uh graceful about it and wait a little bit but in general this is the easiest thing to do and sometimes it's the fastest thing to do. Now, when we talk about locking and and and in that world where you want to break deadlock, you want to kill yourself, there's a bunch more metadata we're going to have about what we did in our transaction that we can make better decisions of whether we should kill ourselves or not. And in that case also with locks, we can go kill other people

too because like in this simple example here, I only have three nodes in my entire data structure. Um, but let's say this T1 over here, it wants to delete a ton of keys and they say it started over this side and it went in this direction and did a bunch of deletes. Did a million deletes, a billion deletes. I don't want to kill them because I, you know, the amount of work they have to then roll back is going to be huge. Whereas all this guys do is reading a bunch of stuff. So the best decision oftentimes is just

kill yourself because you don't then have to reason about or who's more important, me or you, right? And so that logic about when you decide, you know, how quickly you should kill yourself could be a little bit smarter based on what you've done. Like if I if I've had to update a bunch of things, then I'll let myself maybe maybe wait a millisecond or so before I kill myself. >> The other side will kill it faster. Yeah, that's how I kill this faster and then you come back and I mean in the end

like it's again there's no free lunch. We can't just magically peer and say, "Oh, I know you're doing this." You got to make some decision and the best you can do is based on what your own knowledge. Yes. Right in the back behind No, behind you. Yes. >> The question is why not skip this node and go to one that doesn't have a latch? So this is again find all keys uh going back here. Find all keys greater than one. So you're right. There may be other nodes over here that like I could have

accessed, but like I can't get to them without going through the leaf. I have to go back up and have figure out how to jump back down to some middle point, keep track of the one I didn't see to then then go read it. It's just way more complicated. >> Question. Yes. Yes, >> you you can't kill the you can't kill other threads. It's just way too hard. >> All right, hold up. So, this gets into the logical correctness. So his statement is if I'm doing what what I

thought you were going to say is if if I'm doing a write and I need to acquire a right a latch in right mode but it's already in read mode then it'd be nice if I can kill the other one. You can't. Uh so what I thought you were going to say is oh I'll let myself sleep a little bit longer because I know what the work I've done is more you know I'm doing right that's more important. Uh I'll let myself sleep more. The you would do that. Yes. There's also other things you can do like if

basically when I want to do any operation there's a while loop around this. So like if I try to do a write I can't acquire the latch I I bail out and then I'll just try try to do that operation again. And then now you can keep track of how many times have I tried this and it failed uh because I don't want to start myself forever. So then if I've tried a bunch of times then maybe I'll I'll sleep a little bit longer because more likely to get to this. Then there's a high level

mechanism to say okay if I really can never get to this this right latch I need there's a schedule up above and say okay well pause any from accessing this data structure until this guy goes through and gets what he needs all right but then you were suggesting to do what again >> right so he said if if I the thread is trying to the right latch and send held in read mode you're better off killing the the reader because I'm going to update it now and whatever it read is now out of date. That's a logical

correctness thing. Is that actually right right or not? Depends on higher level concepts of the ordering of the transactions which we're not talking about yet. So for example, if if I insert key five, then I go try to back and read key five and in between that someone goes and deletes key five. Is that correct? It depends. What's that? >> Yes. What I'm saying? No, I'm saying ignore deadlocks. Ignore all this this trying to cry latches. I'm saying just I have a data structure. It's single

threaded. I insert something. I then go try to read it again. Before I can go read it again, someone else comes through and deletes it. Now I read it and I don't see it. Is that correct or not? Physically it is. Logically, it may not be. That's this higher level concept of correctness for transactions which we're not covering yet. In some cases that may be okay other cases no >> yes >> sorry I just don't at the end of the day what's the reason why we don't want to

usually when you talk about synchronization do some form of waiting what's so different about this >> so you can wait but I'm saying you're not going to wait indefinitely >> but then something >> yeah no you you b whatever you've done if if you've updated things or it's a read you bounce out of the data structure and go back and try again because the idea is that by the time you come back and try another time the latch you couldn't quite before may now be

available and and it's super simple to implement and and works in works general in practice yes >> practice like are there no problems associated >> the statement is in practice are there starvation problems yes there could absolutely could be this is what I'm saying you that's why you have a higher level mechanism in your system keeping track of like oh I've tried to do this a bunch of times and I can't do it let me pause other workers and prevent them from getting in this data structure

until you go do what you need to do. >> Now, if everybody's trying to update the exact same key, I mean, then you're basically single thread. There's nothing you can do. Like, if everyone's trying to update, I don't know, like everyone reads are easy, but like everyone's trying to update, I don't know, Taylor Swift's like message board or something like that, right? I'm trying to write this one record over and over again. That's basically you're just lined up

single threaded. Nothing you can do. All right. So, everything I've said so far is basically re reiterated on the slide, right? The simplest thing is again just just killing yourself because again there isn't going to be any mechanism to handle deadlocks you know to detect them and break them automatically when we talk about transactions it'll it'll do that right the best protocol is this no wait mode basically you know don't wait to try to cry the latch if I can't get it

immediately kill myself again you can relax that a little bit you wait a small amount uh and then try and then the amount you wait for every single sort of high operation retry will be the So the for rights, we talked about this sort of briefly, but anytime I make a change to a leaf node, I want to hold the right latch on that on that node because I don't know whether I'm going to have to roll back because I can't get a latch on some other node. So to keep track of what changes I made is is

basically this thread local storage or worker local storage what I have what called it's called the right set where basically for every every node that I've touched I have the right latch on on on a on a leaf node here's the list of the keys I've inserted and and deleted because now if I go ahead and do a uh if I can't acquire the latch I have to roll back I basically want to undo all those changes and then then jump out of the data structure now split the merge is a bit more tricky

because it may be the case that I did an insert or delete and I then re reorganized the data structure. It'd be kind of expensive to go ahead and undo all of that. So sometimes this is what we said uh two lectures ago. Sometimes maybe okay to be slightly unbalanced and not do a complete reversal of a split. the data structure still has the keys sort of pointing in the right direction, but it's really cheap for me then to undo any changes I I needed because I just removed maybe the key I inserted

the causal split, but it's still it's still in the sort of that that postsplit uh uh layout and then some at some later point if I you continue inserts and deletes all that sort of get washed away and put back in correct order and that that's okay. Okay. All right. Uh, we're out of time for going over project two, but I can cover that next class. But again, the main take away from all this is the the data structure. Making them threads is super super tricky. This is what you'll be

doing in project two. And so the way to get started on project two is start with not making it multi-threaded. Just do single threaded first because it'll make your life easier and then worry about adding those things later on. So next class we're now going to talk about how to build all the stuff we've done the things we've done so far and start actually running real queries. So we'll start with the algorithms run for operators and build up from there to run complete query plans. Okay. All right.

Hit it. [Music] over [Music] the fortune. Get the fortune Maintain flow with the grain. Get the fortune Maintain flow with the grain.

