[music] [music] I'm still associate. [music] [music] You're doing well. >> Yeah. Okay. Uh, how's your money situation? It's okay. >> Yeah, it's it's getting better. >> Okay, good to hear. Uh, again, that's He's like, I need to make money as a DJ. I'm like, all right, come. We'll pay you to do this, but like anything else you can't do you want to do? I can't do that with you. Okay, I got it, kid. All right. All right, for you guys, a lot to cover

today. Um, so again, reminder for a bunch of things coming up for you guys in the class. Again, homework threes we do this Sunday. Again, the idea is that you submit it on Sunday and then we will give you back the solutions uh on on Monday because uh one week from now in this room at the same time uh we will have the midterm exam. I won't be here. My number one PG students will be here to practice the exam. The main thing to know is that there's a study guide available online with the practice exam

that's posted on Piaza. Make sure if you show up here, bring your SMU ID so we can keep track of who is who when when you turn in your exam. And then for the uh for the notes, it's single sheet of paper, double-sided, eight and a half by 11. Uh want them to be handwritten, so you're just not like taking slides and shrinking them down to fit on a single paper. And if you want to write on your tablet and print it out, that that's fine, too. Okay. Any questions about the exam? Again, if if things are unclear, please

post some pata. And then project two went out on uh Monday this week. Uh and that'll be due after we come back from fall break. Okay. All right. There was actually one big announcement uh three hours ago in the world of databases. There was an acquisition. Anybody hear what it is? I know what it is. Uh data bricks bought another company. Uh so they bought Moon Cake. They're actually going to give a talk with us in like I don't know three or four weeks after fall break. Uh so they were

Postgress with duct DB inside of it. So you you run your queries and you have anical query. It could then call down to DuckDB and then read and write to iceberg uh who again we had them give a talk um whatever last week kept saying how important iceberg was again data bricks is data bricks bought the iceberg people for two billion and now they bought moon cake for uh we go and then there's there's texting um whatever that's a weird flex all right uh um yeah so they're just they have a ton of

Everyone's waiting for go IPO and they're hiring a ton. All right. So, uh the where we're at now in the course is again from this diagram I showed uh earlier in the semester where we said we're going to sort of start at the bottom to disk layer and and work our way up. Now, we're up here at the operate execution. So, we know how to build a dis uh disk manager, a buffer pool manager to read and write pages from disk into memory. we know now how how to build indexes and other data

structures on top of our buffer pool to allow us to access the data. Um so now it's time to start talking about okay let's let's let's run some queries. So for the next four lectures, so this class which will be covered on on the midterm and then next class which is not covered on the midterm and then a week after the fall break, we'll start talking about how you actually going to take queries and execute them and produce results as you would see when you run you know duct db SQL light my

SQL whatever you want uh in your local terminal how do you get back how do you get back to those results that people are asking for. So today's class uh we're going to be focusing on sorting algorithms. Next class will be about joins. Sort of the two again two sort of fundamental things you need to have in your database system. And then afterwards we'll talk about how do you actually then build the database system to take these different algorithms that we can support and read on the data we

we stored on disk or bring in buffer pool and produce results. Okay. So the first thing to understand about where we're going forward next is what these query plans are actually going to look like. So this is now we're going to start bringing back some of the relational algebra stuff we talked about in the beginning. But the high level idea of a any of a query plan is that it's just going to be this directed data structure. Usually a tree. It's better off to be a DAG, but not all systems do

that. We'll cover why that matters later on. But it's basically some treel like data structure here where you have on the the leaf nodes are all the the tables I want to access, right? or the the the the the data that you know that we're storing uh in some materialized form as part of a table or a file whatever that's all at the bottom and then essentially they're going to be feeding data up into these operators uh like a filter or a join or a projection or whatever and each operator is going

to do some computation on it based on how help what the operator is defined to do and then at the end we produce a final result that we then send back to the client and that's the result of your query. So this is obviously PowerPoint and there's a bunch of boxes going up on the lines. So it doesn't really mean anything but there's a bunch of lowle details of of uh or design decisions we can have in our system for what these boxes actually represent. Like are we sending single tupils? Are we sending

columns? Are we sending the entire result? Are we pushing the data from the from the bottom to the top? Are we pulling it from the top to the bottom? Right? There's a bunch of those things we'll cover after after fall break. Right? But the high level idea what you need to understand is that there's these sort of fundamental steps uh in our query plan that will be represented by these relational operators uh that are going to again produce some portion of the of the of the final result that we

need for our query and then once once we reach the root node that's what get that's what gets sent back to the to the client. Okay. So now also hearkening back to the beginning of the semester when we start talking about the algorithms we're going to implement to execute these queries we have to remind ourselves that we're focusing on what is again what are called disoriented database systems where the system has to assume that the the table you're trying to access or trying to uh query against in these

query plans may not fit entirely in uh in in main memory. And furthermore, the thing be aware about is that the intermate results in between these operators in our query plan that may not fit in memory either. So we may have to to write those things out to disk in order to give the illusion that we we can fit everything in memory. And so this means that if we if there are times where we think we're going to have to write the out the disk, we're actually going to choose algorithms that may not

be asmmptoically as efficient as other algorithms, but they're going to maximize the amount of sequential IO that we have to do. And therefore, that's how we're going to get better performance. And in particular, when we talk about sorting today, you know, the fastest algorithms are going to be like quick sort or power sort pick whatever your favorite one is. But those are great when everything's in memory. But if you have to go read and write data from disk because you're running out of you're running out of

memory in your buffer pool and you got to spill to disk, then those algorithms are actually going to be not great and there'll be better ones that we'll talk about today. Okay. Again, it's another example why we don't want to rely on the operating system to manage and memory for us because we can make all these decisions about what we actually want to stage uh keep in memory and write out or if we want to prefetch things. the OS doesn't know anything about what what what this

query plan is actually doing. Uh so it's not going to make good decisions whereas we know exactly what this query plan is because because we have to execute it. So we know like we're running down here what the other stages are going to be and we can make decisions about where we're going to put data and when we're going to read it and write to disk. Okay. So should be kind of obvious why we want sorting in our database system, right? Uh but it's good to understand some some some

key goals where I have why we're going to want to do this. Obviously is that the one big obvious thing is that the relational model is unsorted, right? We said that it was based on set algebra. In the case of SQL, it's based on bag algebra, right? There could be duplicates, but everything's unsorted. And so many times in applications, people are going to want data sorted. And the way you can ask for this in SQL is through an order by clause. Right? So if you can say, hey, I want this data in this table, sort it based

on some arbitrary keys either ascending, descending order, other characteristics, other parameters we can pass in. And therefore, we need to support that. But one of the things we'll see uh in today's class as well is that even if the query is not asking for the data to be sorted in a certain way that we may end up still actually want to sort it because therefore we can choose different algorithms uh in our query plan that'll be more efficient because we know the data is sorted versus being

unsorted. Right? Most obvious thing would be and we'll see this later on when we talk aggregations. If I sort my data, then it's really easy for me to then figure out to remove uh duplicates when I want to have a distinct clause because sort of scan through the sort of data and if I see that a key is not the is the same as the last one I just looked at, then I I can just throw it away. In other cases, uh if you're doing a join, uh you may there's join algorithms we'll see next class where you actually

sort the data first then and then you and then you uh then you merge it together and that's really efficient to do as well. In some systems like in um in SQL Server, they will recognize that hey, it'd be really nice if I had a B+ tree on this table that you don't have. So they'll sort the data first, then build a B+ tree on top of that sorted data, do whatever it is they need to do in the query, and then immediately throw it away once the query is done, right? They call it a spooling index. So again in

that example you it's much more efficient to build a B+ tree if you sort the data first because then you just go along the leaf nodes and build the scaffolding up above rather than doing things peacemail or incrementally again. So in general sortings can be really helpful for a bunch of different things and obviously we want this to be as efficient as possible. So if the data either the tables at rest or our inate results if that can fit entirely in main memory then we don't need anything we're gonna talk about

really in this class today because then you just pick whatever your favorite sorting algorithm is you learned in CS 101 right kids usually say quick sort uh and there's Tim sort power sort like go read read the Wikipedia page there's a ton of different sorting algorithms pickle sort cycle sort gnome sort cocktail shaker sort there's a ton of these right and they all have different properties If everything's in memory, then pick one of those and you'll be fine. There is one uh one optimization

you can do. If you know the data is mostly sorted, then there's algorithms that can take advantage of that and not do sort of the full quick sort uh setup. There's something called verge sort that came out a few years ago. There's a bunch of algorithms that have ability to recognize whether the data is already sorted. If not, they bail out, fall back to quicksort. Otherwise, they then plow through and do uh they can run things more efficiently almost like an insert sort. And there's a lot bunch of these

visualization tools people like to make to show you the different uh so the the how data moves around when when you run one of these sorted algorithms. Again, like if everything's in memory, no big deal. Pick pick your favorite one. Tim sort is what Python uses. Actually, they got rid of Tim sort recently, but now it's like power sort uses quicksort. You know, all these ones are are pretty common. But again, it's when we fall when when we can't fit everything in disk. And we would know this because we

know how much memory we we have in our buffer pool manager. Uh or typically a query is allocated a certain amount of memory used for sorting or working memory. So we'd know that hey, we got to we have to sort one gigabyte of data, but we only have 800 megabytes of RAM or buffer space to use. Then we got to fall back and and use something else. So the thing to understand what we're now going to be sorting is is what are called runs. And so the input to these sorting algorithms would sort of be this

unsorted runs or semi- sorted runs. And then the then you run your your sort of sorting algorithm and then you starting with you know if it's in memory you run quick sort of that then we'll see how to do this in in multiple stages with external ma sort. Uh but you end up producing an output. The output is just that that input run in sorted based on whatever the key you want to sort on. And so it isn't just going to be like in uh your algorithms class we have like a list of numbers. You want to sort those.

Remember that we we're talking about tupils in in in in a database or in tables. So it's actually going to be a key value pair where the key is going to be whatever it is that I want to sort on and the value is going to be either a the actual tupil that the key belongs to or a a pointer to it or record ID to it. And we won't talk about this too much in this class. We'll see this more when we talk about joins and and sort of query processing later. But the two choices of what the value is going to be can depend

on what kind of system you're building. Now you see this why the these all these understand what these different layers are are going to matter because one is actually be better than another in different scenarios. So if I'm building a row store system then I want to use typically what's called a early materialization meaning the the the the sorted runs are going to contain the key followed by the entire tupil like all the the bytes for the tupil that I fetch from from a page right and the reason why this this makes

sense in a row store because when I go fetch the page for a tupil I'm getting all the data that I need at the moment I go fetch that page so I don't I want to be able to I don't want have to go back and fetch more data later on and I don't need to if everything's all there. If you're building a column store, they often use what is called late materialization. Meaning instead of storing the actual tupil data, since I only have to bring in the pages I need if it's a column

store and not maybe the entire thing, then I just keep track of the record ID or the offset in the columns for the tupil, whatever it is that I'm sorting on. And then at some later point if I need to go get the rest of the data, I just follow that record ID to get the thing thing that I need. Right? And the idea here is you don't want to pass around a bunch of data that you don't need if you're going to end up throwing away a bunch of columns in your query. So I'm bringing this up to say like I'm

not going to show you the value portion of the of all the data we're be sorting in in this class. Uh we'll see this later again when we talk about joins. But like just understand it isn't just the keys. I also got to pass along extra data to know like what the key belongs to. >> What is the question? What's the value? K. It's a key an attribute. >> It's like it's it's some subset of columns of a table that I'm sorting on the sort. You call you would call it the

sort key. It's the same key you build the index on columns, right? It's the same thing. So this is a it is a bit of a debate in in database systems when you build OLAP systems which one you want to actually use for row store you almost always use early materialization because again you don't you're already fetching the page you get all the data might as well just copied along whether or not to use late materialization is depends on who you ask uh one of the earlier systems that built you know one of the early data

systems that was a column store that did late materialization was Vertica but then they said that was a mistake and they got rid of it wouldn't start reading from S3 click Click house put a blog article out uh five three or four months ago where they said they added late materialization. Uh so again we'll talk about this more later but this is uh you know this is very important when we talk about how we actually do query processing on column store systems. All right so today's class we're going

to talk about sort of the two main sorting algorithms you would see in a data system topend heap sort and uh external merge sort. Then we'll then we'll talk about how we do aggregations with sorting and then also give a preview of how to do aggregations on using hash tables or hashing because then that'll segue us into next class when we talk about joins because the big date debates can be whether I want to do a sort merge join or a hashbased hash join and then today we have a flash talk

from the mother duck guys which is the one of the commercial incarnations for duckd and again you may be thinking like why do they spend all this time talking about sorting isn't that like from the 1960s in computer science like quicksort is like the 60s or 70s, right? Who cares about this all like in, you know, nowadays anyway? Well, this is still a hot topic in database systems because there's always ways to improve these these these sorting algorithms. Duct people put out a blog article last week

where they went back and rewrote their their entire sort algorithm to improve performance based on a bunch of the techniques and things that that we'll talk about today. Some of this is like low-level C++ stuff that's not really germanine to the high level topics. But again, I want to show you that like sorting isn't a solved problem in databases even though the topic is really really old. Same thing we talk about transactions. Transactions go back to the 1970s. Uh but it's it's an unsolved problem.

All right. So the first sorting algorithm I talk about is top end heap sort. And this is a special case sorting algorithm where if you recognize that the data has to be sorted and you have a limit clause or you have a you have a restriction on the number of tools you want as part of the output then a shortcut is just to scan the data once and find the top end entries that you need as part of your output and and spit that out. Right? So say I have a query like this select star from from the enroll table order by

the student ID ascending and then now I have this extra parameters I can put at the end where I say I want the the the first four rows. This is like a limit clause but this is the SQL standard says says go like this but then al I also can specify whether I want ties in my my output result or not. So this same with ties. So I have even though I want the top four results if there are two of the same key that are in the top four I would have more than four as my output. So the way to implement this is pretty

pretty basic. You just have some kind of sort of heap data structure like a priority queue and you just scan through your data in sequential order once and you just keep updating things in the sorted heap. So in this case here my sorted heap is empty. I see that I have the first thing pointing out is key3. Well, since it's empty, I know that this is going to be the uh the smallest value. So I just go ahead and add that. Scan along. Now I see four. Four is greater than three, so it goes after

three in the sort of heap. Same as six. Six goes after four. And then in this case here, two now is less than three. It's the smallest value I've seen. So I just slide everybody over and I put two in the front. And now in this case here, I see a nine. Nine is is uh larger than the smallest larger than the largest largest value I have in my sort of heap because I can keep track of the min and max pretty easily. So in this case here, I don't even bother processing nine. I just skip it and move on to the next one because I

know it'll never fit in my top four results that I want. Now here I see one. One is less than two. Uh but and and therefore it's going to slide in the front. Six gets pushed out. I come along here. Now I see four again. And because my query asked that I want to keep ties uh keys that have the same value. Then now I just need to extend my sort of heap to add more more space or more buffer space to put in the ties and then keep going the next four and then until I get the end. In this case here, eight is is greater than the

largest value I have my sort of heap greater than four. So go ahead and go ahead and skip that. So I can do I can run this argument in log n or sorry not log n in n. Uh because I I have to scan all the keys once and I populate my sort of heap. That's obviously not done at end time, but it's pretty pretty easy to do. And and this would be pretty efficient in the back. Yes. So I think your question is how do I know that whether or not the the data I want to scan or the the output result is

going to fit in memory uh and especially if I have multiple queries running at the same time and how to balance that. So we're not going to talk about resource allocation and scheduling but the simplest way to think about this is like in Postgress you say every query is allowed x amount of memory right and then you then you specify a parameter of like how many concurrent queries allow allowed to run at the same time and so you just say all right well I have a gig I'll give each each uh you know each

each query is allowed to use up to you know 100 gigs of 100 megabytes of memory and then if I the data I'm going scan in this case here the original data the original data doesn't have to fit in memory but I obviously want my sort of heap in memory so I would just do a sequential scan along the original data I rely on my buffer pool to decide how to evict things we talked about arc and MRU and other things so that that's why this all matters so I scan along my data once and then I I just populate this

thing the sort of heap will typically fit in memory this is not that big right if I if I'm asking for the fet fetch the first billion rows then yeah that's going to be a problem but again I would know that ahead of time the SQL's declarative. I know how much I I know how many results you're asking. Um and therefore I can roughly I can calculate how big do I think this data structure is going to be and I can decide whether it's going to fit in memory or not. the enterprise systems do a much better

job at uh slicing dicing resources uh where you you can allow like hey this this query everybody's allowed to use 100 megabytes but if I'm not using 100 megabytes I can borrow some from from another system from sorry from another query and they can be a bit more flexible I think postgress is a bit more rigid in in the parameters you specify so this is one example where the enterprise systems are much better at at at uh at scheduling resources. >> Yes. >> Correct. So the question is if if

there's a lot of ties, how do I estimate the size of this heap? So we're not going to talk about cost estimates just yet. That'll come after the the midterm. But like you have some basic histograms on the data. So you you could figure out like how many distinct values would be in a column, right? You there's little you can the math is a bit fudgy. Uh and because also too it's a summarization it's not the real you don't have the real data. So you basically use some some some simple cost formulas to decide

how big you think this is going to be. And in general you over you overestimate because you don't you don't want to be like really wrong. >> Yes. >> The question is uh do you do you always overestimate from memory? typically yes because again you don't know what you don't know you don't know how much data you're going to how much you don't know the size in result until you actually produce run it. So this is like your hash table when you want to size that

thing so you don't have to like dump it out and resize it uh when you run the queries like they'll try to do an estimate and then they have a fudge factor say oh it's I think I have 100 records but I'll make I'll I might see 150 so I'll just allocate it for that. That's pretty much every system does that because again, you don't know you don't know what you're going to see until you actually see it. We'll spend two lectures on on uh query cost models and cost estimations and all

these things. This is the black magic of data systems and everybody's terrible at it. Uh and it's like really really hard, but we'll we'll cover that later. All right. So again, this is a special case. If you know your your query asks asks for an order by and it's asking for the top end entries, then you can do this and you you don't have to do one one scan of the data once. If it's a general sort request or order by request and I I I can estimate that it's not going to fit in memory, um I

want to use what's called external merge sort. So in this case here, you would know how much you would have a rough idea how much data you're going to scan. Uh it's not always true either because you could do sorting after joins and join estimates get way off. But like just think the most simple thing. If I'm going to scan a table and run an order by without a filter, if I know that the table has a billion tupils, I'm going to have to sort a billion tupils and therefore I can make my cost estimations

based on that. Decide to fall back to this. There are some systems that can uh be a bit more adaptive where they say, "Okay, I think the data will fit in memory. Just start running quicksort. If I get it wrong and I realize I'm I'm spilling to disk, then I just stop what I'm doing, throw away the results, and then fall back to one of these algorithms. But not not every system can do that. All right. So, external merge sort is a divide and conquer algorithm uh where we're going to split the the data up

that we want to sort into separate runs, sort them, and then start merging them together into uh successively larger sorted runs. So there' be essentially two phases uh for for every sort of pass with the first phase we do the sorting. So we just bring in chunks that we can fit into memory, sort them with your favorite inmemory sorting algorithm, a quick sort or whatever, and then we would then could um if necessary write them back out to uh to to pages on disk and then we bring them back in, we'll merge them together

with sorted runs of the same size and produce larger runs is just keep doing this over and over again until we end up with all the data completely sorted. And I'll I'll show a visualization of this. So the general algorithm is called a K-way external merge sort. But I'll start with a simple one which is two-way uh merge sort external merge sort. And then two is going to be the the number of runs we're going to merge uh for every pass that we do. So we're going to take two runs, merge them together to

produce a uh a new sort of run that's twice as large because it's the combination of the two of them. And a K way you can say I'm going to bring in like K pages or K sorted runs and then just merge them all together and produce one that's that's K size and write that out. Again keep a symbol with two. So for this we're going to assume that the data be broken up into big N pages. Uh and then we'll say that the the amount of memory that we're allowed to use in our buffer manager will be uh will be B

pages. And we're going to need that for both the input of the pages that we're bringing in for our for our input runs. And then we need at least one page to write out or we had one page that we'd write out to our uh to disk. So in pass zero, all the data is unsorted on disk. So we're going to bring the pages one one at a time into memory, sort them in place within, you know, well actually not in place, what we make a copy into another bufferable page, sort that page, and then we would

write it back out to disk. We do this until we have all the pages we in in the in the input table with input data sorted. And then we then have the successive passes. Uh we'll recursively merge the pairs of sorted runs into larger and larger larger runs. Uh and then keep doing this until again we have the complete output. So for this type of example here for 2A merge sort we need at least three buffer pool pages. We need two for the input and then one for writing out the output. So again, in the in the first pass, uh

we're just going to read all the pages we have on disk and just sort them, right? So in pass zero, here's all the pages on disk. Again, it's two-way merge sort. We're just assuming that there's uh two keys per page, right? So in the first pass, pass zero, we're going to produce uh sort of runs of size one page. So for every single page at the top, bring it in, sort its contents, the two keys, and then just write that out back back to disk. Again, this is all sequential IO. So we

can scan the table sequentially. And then we when we sort it and write it out, that's all going to be done sequentially as well. Then now in the next pass, we want to generate runs of size two pages because we're doubling the size of the pages uh size of the runs as we go down. So in this case here we're going to bring in uh we're going to bring in these two pages that I have here 3 four and 26 and then we have an output page. We're going to take the uh you know take whatever

the the result of the sorted run uh at least stage stage that sorted output there and obviously we know it's going to be two page runs. So we only have one page to write the first output and when when this gets written out to disk because it's full we'll reuse the page and write something else. So basically in the this sort of merge pass you have two iterators one of they're pointing at the the both of the runs I'm trying to trying to merge together and all you're doing is just comparison of the keys. So

at the beginning here the first iterator points to three the second iterator points to two is less than three because we're going in ascending order. So I'll write out two and then move that iterator on the second page over by one. Now I do the same comparison. Compare three in the first page with six in the second second page. Three is less than six. So I write three. Uh and then now my page is full. So I'm going to go ahead and write that out the disc. But then complete the merging of the the

other pages. >> Question offsets. Disc offsets. Offsets of what? Sorry >> like 3 426. These are the keys. >> Question is uh if I brought the entire page in memory. Yes, you have to because you the keys are in there. My example, it's it's two keys per page. But again, think of like if I have larger keys, I can't just have offsets like when I start comparisons because I have to go check to see values where they're real. So I bring the pages in, scan through them, and then do that that merge

comparison. All right. So, I'll do this all for the other pages uh at this pass. So, I end up with two uh three three runs of size two pages. And the last one here, it's it's sort of it's less than one or less than two, but that's okay. And I I have a little end of file marker to say that there there's nothing else beyond this. So then now in the next pass again I'm going to generate sorted runs of size that double the size of the last pass. So now I'm going to generate uh runs of

size four. Do the same thing. Iterate through the the two two input pages my sorted runs that I'm merging. Do key comparisons to see which one is less than the other and write them out in successive order. And then when I'm done with generating this run I then switch over and do the next run. Do this again and then you end up with a pass of now eight page runs and that's the entire data set. Yes. >> First what? First pass. >> First pass. >> So pass zero. >> Yeah.

>> Okay. >> Pass one >> or pass one or pass zero. >> Pass one. >> Okay. >> Correct. In this example here, I'm assuming I have three p >> three. You only need three. So at any so say I'm here. So for this first guy here like 2 3 4 six that's on that's on this sort of run on this side. I can't use the the red and then there's 47 89. So I only bring this first page here and this first page here from that run. Then I can do my comparison because within the run

they're sorted. I know that there isn't going to be a key on these lower pages here that could be less than over here if I've already successfully moved down on it. So I never need to go back and look at the the the inputs of the sort of runs again and therefore I only need to bring in one page at a time for the two sort of runs. So in this example here we only need three. >> Yes. >> The question is are these these merges consolidating the the results of the sorting into separate pages?

uh no so like going back here so I'm at pass after in pass one the size of the sort of run I'm going to generate will be two pages so the first page I'm going to generate has two and three in it I write that out the disk then then the next page is going to have four and six to it that's a new page and I write that out the disk they're separate pages from from the original pages that I started with up here Yes. >> This question is as soon as we finish generating a new P output page, we write

that out to disk and then we what? Bring another one in. It's already you're like we're going back here. So I wrote out three. So I wrote out two and then I'm going to write out three. That point that thing is is is full. I'm going write that out the disc. But I already have this page and this page in memory. >> Just keep scanning on them. Right? And at some point the iterator will get to the end and say, "Oh, I've seen everything I can see for this one." If one iterator finishes for the

other one, you say, "All right, well, I know there there isn't anything on this side that's going to be less than this side. So therefore, just write out all the from the first iterate out the disc." And it's inserted because I sorted it before I got to doing that pass anyway. >> Yes. the index. >> The question is why didn't it traverse the index? It's already sorted. What index >> the indexing? >> Uh same is why didn't do a why is like want to use the index of the

key is ordered by there may not be an index. What if there's no index? >> Yeah, this is like for any arbitrary key I can sort. If I have an index then yeah I could just scan along leaf nodes and I would use that but I can't. >> Yes. Are you concerned with that? >> His question is and he's right and we'll we'll fix this in a second. Am I worried about IO stalls when I write to disc? Absolutely. We'll do double buffering. That'll that'll make that go away. Yes.

This is the basic algorithm though. Just like I got three pages. I can bring two in and write one out. Okay, so the number of passes we're gonna have to do is one plus log 2 n again it's the one is for the pass zero because I have to pass through the data once and the log two is because I'm generating uh passes of that double the size of the previous one. The n is the total number of pages. Therefore the the total number of IO calls will be 2N because again for the for the plus one that's pass zero I got to read it once

and write it out once hence 2N and then the number of passes up above. So again in this simple example here we just assume that we only have three bufferable pages. Two for the output one for the input. Uh the challenge is going to be though if we even we give we give more buffer pool space to our system you know we're now we can take you generate larger sorted runs right that'll shrink the height of the of the of the sort of the number of passes we have to do but it's still going to be

slow as he pointed out because we are essentially just blocking every time you have to write stuff out block anytime you have to read something right so again we'll fix that in a But in general the algorithm for this for a general external mer assuming you have bufferable pages you're going to produce uh uh to this the ceiling of n divided by b sort of runs since size b and pass zero because again you'd read everything once then write it out once of that size there and then in the subsequent passes

I can generate runs that are size b minus one because I need always at least one buffer for buffer page for my output. Right? And then that's the same formula that we showed before. So let's run through a quick example again without doing any double buffering or any optimizations. Right? So we want to we want to sort a p a data set that has 108 pages and I'm allowed to use five bufferable pages. Right? So big n equals 108 and b equals 5 here. So in pass zero again I got to read everything once and

write it out once in the in the sorted runs. So this will generate 22 sorted runs for me of size five pages each. The last one is only be three pages because 22 or 108 is not easily uh not perfectly divisible by five. And so we take the ceiling there because then that just rounds up, right? And then in pass one now we're reading in the uh those 22 sort of runs of size page five. And now we're going to donate sort of runs of uh size page 10. Sorry, size page 20. Um, and then the last run,

again, it's not full size, so it only end up being eight pages again because you have to round up. And we keep doing this until we reach the end where we produce the uh the two sort of runs that we have to read in. And then we write out one sort of run. That's a total 80 pages that that we originally give as our as our input. All right. So 80 plus 28, right? So in this case here just plug and chugging the formula you end up with four passes because again you're progressively getting uh having the

number of inputs and outputs you sorry the number of pages you always have to read in and out per per pass is the same but it's the number of passes I have to do uh shrinks down once you have more buffer pull spaces. So let's do solve the problem that he brought up where if I naively just block the world in my database system every time I got to read and write a page that's going to be slow because we said disk stalls can be quite expensive right slow spinning hard drives are going to be you know the order of of up

to 10 to to 50 milliseconds right SSDs are a bit faster but even SSDs are really fast but the only way you get that good speed is if you have a lot of things in your your IO queue that you want to read and write in paralle parallel. That's how these these sort of modern systems get get good performance. So if I just do the naive thing where we before like I'm going to sort this data I'll go fetch in all my pages my buffer pool then I go ahead and do the the merge the sort and the merge produce

some output buffer and write that out right while I'm doing this right I'm basically stalling uh the rest of the system the CPU is not doing anything because it's waiting for all this this this data to get written out to disk right so what I want to do is actually use half the buffers that are available to me for sort of one stage of of of a pass and then another I want to say stage like sort of sort of one sort of sliver of a of a of the data I need to sort within one pass and then the other

buffer will be for another sort of sliver of data within within my pass. So now what'll happen is I can fetch in data from one part of the file and then while that's doing the merging which is computationally expensive potentially and writing out the disk I go fetch in now the other pages uh for the other part of of the the path I'm at and then they do their own sorting. I'm sort of pinging ponging or going back and forth where one one sort of one portion of my pool is being used for sorting things in

memory and running out to disk and the other portion of my bull has been used for fetching things from disk because and then go ahead and sorting them. Of course, obviously it's tricky that you don't you know you can't magically uh you know read and write data uh with the same full speed at the same time. So the timing can be be a bit tricky, but modern again modern SSDs can sort of handle all that and and do the balancing to make sure you don't slow things down. So this obviously again this this

reduces the amount of um memory buffer pools they have available to to do large sorted larger sorted runs, but this is going to hide that the IO stalls you would have from the workers waiting for things to get read and written from disk. All right, there's some additional optimizations we can do in our actual implementation. Some of these are low-level things uh where you're kind of trying to shave off again cycles in your CPU, but some of these are actually necessary to actually get the thing to

actually work work well. So the comparison operation is again in an algorithms class they're very handy about that because it's always like oh comparing this integer with that integer and you sort that. In actuality, oftent times data is is usually going to look like strings or be a combination of of multiple keys. And that comparison call to see whether one key is less than another key that can start to add up and be expensive especially if you're trying to sort a billion things. So a bunch of techniques you can do are

uh what is one is called code specialization. So the idea is here is that instead of having uh like in in C++ when these you have these sort of built-in sort sort uh runners you pass in a function to your comparison you patch a pointer to your comparison function and anytime the sort algorithm says I I got to compare two keys it makes a call to that to that function. Well that can be expensive especially if you're trying to interpret what the bytes are in in your keys. Um we have to go look at the catalog and say oh am I

sorting integers? Am I sorting strings and so forth, right? So, a better approach is that if you can pre-generate a bunch of hard-coded versions of your comparison function that sorts keys on on a certain type, then you can now inline that in your sorting algorithm and then it's much faster because now you're doing not doing the jump call in your CPU to jump to some other location in your address space and call your your sorting function. And then you don't have to worry about also too like

interpret how to figure out what the bittes are. you just call you know reinterpret cast and you know because you know exactly what the data should look like. So there's a bunch of different ways to do this. One is you can do code generation just in time compilation on the fly. So some systems like like single store from a few weeks ago, they will uh when your query shows up and you want to sort it on some keys, they will then codegen the comparison function in like LLVM and compile that to machine

code and then now you're making a function call into uh machine code that's sort of hardcoded for exactly comparison two keys. Postgress kind of does this too. It's bit of a hack but like it's written in C so you have to deal with this. So in postcript if you compile it by hand like a instead of downloading the binaries and compile the binary by s compile it from the source there's a pearl script that runs before you compile it that takes their comparison function and then makes a bunch of copies of it that have

different versions for different data types. So they have a have a comparison function for integers comparison function for floats. It basically is duplicating the code and then compiling into the binary and then at runtime it knows which sort of specialized version of the sorting algorithms they should use. It's basically templating, but it's because they're in C and not C++, they have to sort of do this little Pearl script hack. Another trick you can do is is called suffix truncation. I think we talked

about this when we talked about bar charts before, but basically instead of doing the sort of the full key comparison of two strings, you're basically iterating over, you know, every every every bite doing one one by one comparisons. um you can you can premputee a a prefix of the varchchar as the key like think of like a 32-bit integer and then now I can do fast comparisons to see whether those those two prefixes are the same. If no then I know how to do you know easy comparison to say whe whether one value is less

than another and that's way faster than having to look at the full key. If the two prefixes are the same then I fall back to doing the the fast the slower comparison. And this one's a bit more nuanced. Um uh it's an old technique from the 70s. It's actually in the ductb article that came out last week. Um but basically if you if you have varchars, you don't want to have to have um these these arbitrary lengths sized keys because I'm trying to keep everything nice tight tightly

packed uh and always be fixed length. So if I can keep everything as dictionary codes, great. But not always like I I can't can't always do that especially if the same column comes ac comes from different files that may have different dictionary codes with the same values. So they have a way to normalize all this by transforming any arbitrary name key into a sort of binary representation. Um you do a little padding to make sure everything's always fixed length and then I can do uh fast comparisons on

that. Again, just just trying to point out here we we'll cover more of this in the advanced class, but the that like just checking to see whether one value is less than another value that actually is expensive at scale and especially if you're doing it a lot whereas something in like your you know algorithms intro algorithms class they'll be very hand wavy over this because they're not worried about actually working on real data. All right. So sort of what they were asking about like can I just use the

index again external merge sort or the inmemory sorting algorithms we need to do this if there isn't a data structure we can use or B+ tree we can't use a hash table because hash table's unsorted but if we do have a sorted data structure then the we can take advantage of that in some cases by just scanning along the the leaf nodes uh for for the data assuming that it's sorted on that key and then we can get the data that that we Now the challenge is going to be is like since the keys in the B+ tree may not

actually be the full tupil and we if we need the full tupil as part of the output of the query we got to go then get that the data and the challenge is going to be in that case is that the the the data might be stored in the in our table pages uh in a manner that's different than than what's defined in the in the index. So the indexes could help us for maybe finding a subset of the data more quickly, but if we got to go fetch the data, we we have to put it back in the correct sort of order anyway. And that

could be a bunch of a random IO which could kill us. So if we have a a cluster B tree again where the the tupal pages the tubles themselves are in the same sort order as defined on your B+ tree, fantastic. Then we don't want to use external merge sort or any sort of algorithm because again we just rip along the leaf nodes. that's sequential assets and everything's sorted already in the way that we want. That's fine. If it's uncclustered, then having to chase pointers to go get the tupils as defined in the

in the the ordering of the keys in the leaf pages and then putting that back into the the the order that we want as part of our output. that's actually gonna be terrible uh in the general case because again it's a bunch of random IO's to different different pages and I can't do that trick we talked about before where I can sort the pages uh that I want to access uh so that I'm only fetching in one page at a time because it has to be in the order that's defined by the order by clause or

whatever whatever the ordering is requires then this is going to be random IO and it's going to be terrible and we just want to fall back doing the external merge sort if you're doing top end where I I know only need a you know n number of queries or sorry n number of tuples my query then this might be okay because I might be going getting like 10 pages at most that's not so bad but anything else this this is not going to be great okay so again if it's in memory use your favorite sorting algorithm if it's a

limit if it's order by clause with a limit then use the top end heap sort if anything else if it's too large then I want to fall back to external merge sort All right. So, let's finish up talking about aggregations. Um, yeah. Go ahead. Yes. >> Question. Bus trees are stored in disk for this [snorts] class. Yes. Some systems don't, but this class yes. Postgress? Yes. Most systems? Yes. No. So, so his statement is the question is uh are we assuming that the B+ tree cannot be stored on disk? Not not fit

entirely in main memory. No, could right if if the buffer was enough space. And then there's a whole bunch of like policies you could set. Do I want do I want to make sure that my buffer my my B+ trees always fit in memory and prioritize them over the tupal pages? So systems let you do that, right? Depends. I know again I keep saying it's a copout. It depends on like what your workload is, what your hardware is. Okay, so aggregations again we this goes back again to the earlier in the semester where the idea is that we want

to scan some data and produce uh scale results for some kind of computation based on you know across multiple tools that we see right so the challenge is that in order to do some of these aggregations we I want to quickly find tupils that match on you know like a group by clause or some other aspect of of the aggregation I'm trying to compute So to do this uh as I said in the beginning there's basically two approaches there sort of two classes of algorithms we can use to do aggregations

and joins from next class it's sorting and hashing and this is like the age-old debate goes back to the 1970s and in in in database systems which of these two approaches are better and it goes back and forth originally sorting was faster in the 70s then hardware got better and hashing got faster and then uh the sorting algorithms got better and then sorting got sorting was considered the preferred choice and but now in general today's hardware in today's landscape hashing them is always is going to be

the better approach right in some cases except when as we'll see in a second if if the data needs to be sorted uh because there's an order by clause then I can just piggyback off of that sorting in some cases and do my aggregation right but in general hashing is always be better uh if your disc is slow so let's say I have a query like this select with a distinct clause uh from the enroll table where the I want to get all the records where the the grades are either B and C and I want

to order by the course ID. So again, think of this as that tree data structure we saw before, but I'm showing this sort of a sequential ordering, but I'm scanning the RO table. I do a filter. I I I throw away the tubles that don't, you know, don't match the gray I'm looking for. And then I'll do a projection, remove the columns that I don't need in my output. So in this case here, I only need the the course ID. So I can throw away everything else. And now I'm going to sort it

based on what's defined in my order by clause, right? Sorting on the course ID. And then the last step, my query plan is I want to remove the the duplicates because I want to distinct. So in this case here with my sort of output, all I need to do is have a cursor or an iterator just scan through sequentially in this output. And anytime I see a tupil or sorry a record that is the same as the last one I just looked at then I know I I can ignore it and discard it because again you know because it's in

sorted order like I get to the bottom for 15826 I'm not going to see 445 again because 826 is greater than 445 and I've already passed that part here. Right? So for distinct this is pretty easy and again they wanted the data ordered on the course ID anyway. So I just piggyback off of that sorting to do my duplicate elimination. I don't have to build a separate hash table to do that. For other things it could be more tricky. Um but even if you don't want the data sorted you may still the the data system

will still could still decide to do sorting uh based aggregation. Not always but some will. Um, so again, so now a different query. I want to get the average GPA of all the students enrolled in in certain courses. So assuming I've already done my join, I'm not we'll talk about next how we actually do that. So I have now a bunch of course IDs and then the student GPA. So I'll sort my data based on the course IDs and then now again I'll just scan through my my data and then compute a running total of

whatever the aggregation function that it wants. So what I'm showing here at the top is the way you basically do is it's pretty straightforward, right? For min and max, you just keep track of the the largest smallest value I've seen. For the count, I'm just adding one to to a counter summation. Just adding things in the case of average, you just keep a running total of the summation of the column and the number of records you've seen and you just divide it at the end and it produces the I mean for for

arithmetic mean for geometric mean is more complicated, but we could ignore that. So in this case here, my iterator starts. I keep track of the last key that I've seen because I know they're going to be in sorted order. So it's the last course ID I've seen. It's the beginning. It's null. And then I have my first record. I have a counter that says I've seen one tupal so far. And here's the running sum of the GPA. Then I set my previous to 15445. Come down here. I see the same key again. 15445. So I just

update my running total. Increment the counter by one. Add the the GPA to the summation. Go down here. Now I see a key that doesn't match my previous one that I've seen. So at this point here, I know I'm never going to see 15445 ever again in my sort of output. So I can take this whatever I computed here, do the math, divide the uh the summation by the the count, and then store the GPA in my computer result here. Same [clears throat] thing, update the previous uh key that I've seen. Get down

here. I it's not matching. 826 doesn't equal 721. So I put 1571 here. do the same thing till I reach the bottom then I know I'm done and then I put my output there pretty straightforward window functions a bit more tricky and we can cover that next class if we have time so the alternative to sorting is going to be hashing so if we don't need the data to be sorted there often times hashing is gonna be much better and the basic idea is that we're going to build hash tables or divide our data into partitions based

on hash functions. And again, it's going to be a divide and conquer approach where we can generate smaller subsets of the data that we want uh to that we can keep things in memory and not have to do as much uh uh random IO. So for hashing aggregation, you basically build a hash table in memory and as you're scanning through through the data, you just update entries in that hash table when you have matches. And if the hash table doesn't fit memory, then we'll have to do sort of recursive partitioning or do do

partitioning. And we'll see how to do that in a second. >> Oh [ __ ] sorry. Let me just mute them. Okay. Sorry. >> All right. There we go. Sorry. All right. Um, let make sure they can hear me. I don't want to jump yet, but they want to know when I'm done. I think I'm muted, right? I can't see. >> Yes. >> Am I muted or no? >> All right. I want to be unmuted so they can know. All right. Sorry. All right. So a hashing aggregate again we maintain this hash table we we'll populate it as

we go along and then if everything fits in memory it's easy if not we have to handle that if it doesn't fit memory then we have to do what's called external hashing aggregation uh where we're going to take a pass over the data use one hash function to split it up into partitions then bring those partitions one at a time into memory and again that's going to be IO and the uh the do whatever it is the aggregation I want to compute produce some hash table and then when I'm done with that partition

swap out to to the next partition so this is repeating what I said in the first phase you part partition things up can I do a scruncher scan on the data hash it once figure out what bucket it goes to or uh you partition buckets it goes to then the second pass I'll bring it those this this partition in one by one and do whatever the computation I need. So let's look that example again. I want to run the distinct clause on the on the RO table. So again do my filter that's all fine. Do a projection. That's

all fine. But then now I'm going to scan through the the this intermediate output here and for every single key I'm going to hash it put it into one of these partitions uh which can be a series of of pages right and assuming I have um you know B minus one partitions I could use I I could have that much space because say I can bring in one of these pages at a time over here then I'm going to write it out to B minus one pages pages over here. So this is the opposite of what we saw sort of the sorted runs where like

my input is larger and my output is one. In this case here, I want my output to be larger because I'm trying to split these things up into into uh individual buckets. So in this case here, if this if this page gets full, then I'm going to just go ahead that write out the disk and just make a new page for it and keep filling that up. So now in the second phase I'm going to bring all those pages in from partition one at a time. Again I can do that in squ uh sequential io and then now generate some kind of hash table that

that's going to build the the running total the aggregation I'm trying to compute. And then when I'm done with that partition I take whatever the results in that hash table and I put it to some kind of final result buffer. So going back here. So these are the the buckets I generated before. So in partition zero I had I had two pages. Partition one is one page and so forth like that. So I started the first the first uh partition. I'm just going to scan through sequentially. In this case

here I'm computing distinct. So it's pretty obvious like I do a hash I land in my hash table and if it's not if there's no entry there for my key I put it there. Otherwise I just ignore it. Then I do the same thing. I scan through all these entries doing the same thing hashing over and over again. I keep seeing the same key. So there's nothing else to add. And then now when I'm finished with that that partition, if I assume that my data is going to be really big, I could take whatever in

this hash table, write it out to a result buffer, and then clear clear this hash table for for the next partition. Because again, I've already divided the data up so that when I'm at partition partition level one, I'm never going to see 15445 again because if there's no way it could have gotten to that level when I hashed it because again, the same key will always have the same hash value. So they end up at the same partition level. So I'll never see I'll never see 1545 ever again once I finish

that. So what's that? Can I guarantee that this the hash table here is going to fit memory? >> Uh does it fit in a single page? No, you can't guarantee that. But you would say uh again you you would have some kind of approximation of how big it should actually be. And if I have a billion keys and it takes you know takes pabytes then that's a problem. But any algorithm is going to break down if you do that. Right? So you get this point here. Then I take the next key h I'm gonna hash it

again point the hash function we're using here at this sort of second pass has to be different than the other one because we kind of want to spread things around um because you again the in this case here it's simplified where like there's only one key per level but you could have multiple keys end up in the same level and so the first first hash function put them into the same partition so I want to use a different hashing function when I build this hash table so that different keys don't then

end hashing to the same thing again. >> Yes. >> If they collide then like it's okay because I can I just do linear probing my hash table. Yeah. Assume this is a linear probing hash table. Hash table. All right. So then same thing I get to this level next partition here. I can write out the contents of this blow away the contents of my hash table. Again you don't have to you don't have to delete the pages and start over. You can set a flag and say ignore everything you ever

see afterwards. like basically zero it out and then do the same thing. Produce this final result. Once I'm done scanning all my hash buckets, then I I know I've completed my final result and and I'm done. Again, we can do the same thing with as sorting. We can have this rolling tally of the summation uh or summarization of the data as we go along. Basically, it works the same way where I just going to scan through the the the the buckets that I produced after the first phase. and then just do again whatever hash

function I have now the second time around and compute the same kind of running total in my final result and I would know again if I'm done at a given level I can take whatever this is compute the final result based on what I'm trying to compute and produce produce the fin final output right works the same way except now I'm reading from a hash table instead of reading from sorted list all right So the again the main take away from all this is that the if everything's in memory sorting is is can

be pretty fast. If I have to spill a disk then I want to use external external merge sort to be able to sort things. If uh if I want to do aggregations hashing is going to be oftent times the better approach and most systems will choose that over that. But the main again take away from all this is that we've seen some some of the same techniques uh in this class we've seen in other classes and going forward where we want to try to convert data into sequential blocks so that we can read that out

sequentially and write it out sequentially and read it back in sequentially because that's going to make the the system perform much better because again sequential IO is faster than random IO and then we saw how to use double buffering as a way to hide those disc stalls so that the system can still do useful work while other threads are stalled or workers are stalled reading writing from disk, right? And then this is why we had to do all that conial stuff from last class to make sure all our data structures are

thread safe because we now we know we're going to have multiple threads dancing around in our system trying to to manipulate things. All right, before we switch over to the the guest speaker again, next class will be about joins. This lecture is is in the homework and will be on the midterm next week. next class will not be on the the midterm. >> Thank you. So, thanks Andy. Thanks everyone. I cannot see. Hopefully, you're happy. Um so, I'm here to talk about Modduck. We have about 14 minutes

worth of talking. Uh I don't know if that leaves times for questions or not. Um my name is Boaz. Uh I'm the engineering tech lead for Modak. I'm based in Amsterdam as we just discussed. And uh uh what I chose to talk about with the lens of Modduck is how what does it mean a little bit of building a cloud data warehouse uh based on an impulses O allap database that I understand you guys are familiar with DUTDB but we'll get there. Uh of course it's just 14 minutes so we'll try to a

little bit motivate why because I think that's maybe the most interesting. Why would you even do this? uh and give you some insight into into how how it's done and and what is interested on those various pieces. So let's go. Uh Andy, I don't know how the question answers going on, but if someone wants to raise a question and you want to interrupt me, that's that's fine with me. >> We'll do them at the end. >> Okay, perfect. Okay, so um before we go and say why would you use a single node

database? Uh like I think it's good to take a moment and reflect a little bit of what people do with the cloud data warehouse. And um I think it's Jordan Tigani which kind of had the idea to start something like Madak in the beginning and and other people that followed analyzed query query uh query query patterns and specifically how much data people actually look at when running the query right so quer people have lots and lots of data sitting in their blob stores or in their S3s but then the question is how much do they

actually look at actively and uh here's the a tweet by George Fraser CEO of five train looking at two famous data sets the the queries from Snowflake and Red Shift and you can as you clearly see the vast vast vast majorities uh only look a terabyte or less of worth of data. Okay, so they may have a pabyte sitting there. They may have 500 data terabytes sitting there but they actually typically care about the terabyte or less and intuitively you can say well you know typically you would look at the most

recent data like say two weeks, one month uh or something like that and that is fairly reflected. So that's one one observation. Second observation is that the the building blocks that we use to build a cloud uh data warehouse uh the machine that are available also have materially changed in the last 20 years. Right? So if you look in 2006 very early cloud providers you can get a commodity to say one core uh and 2 GB of RAM which is pretty much nothing in terms of your basic comput and then you will aggregate

hundreds of those to do something meaningful. But if you look today what you can do, you can get pretty much insane machine with 400 cores plus 24 tab of RAM. Uh if you kind of manage to get your hand on one on one of these, that's hard. But if you look at the commodity like something that I just went to EC2 today and I click like yes, I I I want it. Um you can get off the shelf 192 machine with one and a half terabytes worth of one, which is insane. Okay. So what can we do with these two things? Um we can look at the system

that we have built so far and those system are pretty much geared together to take many many many machines right and combine them together to be able to process lots and lots and lots of data right and the reason you need to do it is because the machines were not that powerful. So you'll need to combine them and people were aiming for having lots of data. But as we've just seen that's neither of these necessarily true today. like so the machines are actually quite some powerful and uh maybe we don't need

to analyze so much data so why are we investing in all of that machinery which means both money and CPU time can we be more efficient right and that that is basically kind of the foundational belief below below motheruck is that if you use single nodes and you use them to the maximum you will it will be simpler because you will not have a distributed system it will be efficient because you will not pay uh a kind overhead of network CPU allocation these type of things and if you believe it's efficient

then this actually works wonderfully so that that is kind of monaduck so in monad we we have built a cloud data warehouse based on a single node in posters database system that you guys know namely ductb now duct db is wonderful and it's wonderful not only in a sense that is uh a very recent uh developed database with all the latest and greatest research it's also extremely focused on user friendliness and it can do a lot a lot of things for you. Be it being a classical database which is store data read it out in SQL

or repet file on S3 or pass your CSV file or parse your JSON and so forth and so forth and also had a very rich extension ecosystem to make it even more powerful. So on its own it's very it's very useful and it also has another upside it's very lightweight right it's it's very it's built to be embeddible in many many environment uh and an extreme case you can think you have duct DB is available in your browser if you go to that URL over there and you can process data read data from S3 do whatever you

want to do in full SQL language so it's it's fairly powerful and it's very versatile and very lightweight so if you put these two things together right you you're going to get mad Motheruck uses take your standard duct DB as a client and then connects it with another duct DB instance that runs all the way in the cloud in those as big as you need the machine and then together runs a query in what we call dual execution which means take your query look at what it does and figure out which pieces of it

need to run at in the cloud uh and the compute machines that are available there and which pieces can run can run locally which means that you have no network overhead it's very close to you And putting these things together means you can do quite funky stuff. So for example, here's a visualization built also in CMU by the Dominic Moritz library where it's geared toward taking two charts and interestingly updating uh the two together as you move right and as you can see you move one and the

other one this is real time immediately updates and the only reason you can do so is because you have a full database that running in the browser and there is no network overhead. So every update only needs to do the compute locally and not have to go all the way to the browser. We can also use it to uh increase build a much nicer ID. So here's a film of the motheruck UI where we have a sample of your data set cached locally and that means that we can run your SQL locally and give you instant

preview of what you're typing and like whether the columns that you added are correct, if your modifications are correct. Again, this is a real time movie recorded by the senior engineer for me this afternoon. Uh it it is very very snappy and the only reason that is the case is because we do not need to go to the cell. Okay, so that that's a little bit of the motivation and what you can do when you have it. But I want to address the like the the one concern of that chart is it didn't say all queries go below 1 TB or

less. It said that by far the majority of them. But what happens if you get to go higher? And I want to go a little bit to how uh to how we think about that. So to do that, let's divide the world a little bit into a system, right? And that system looks at two axises. The amount of data that you need to analyze and the amount of compute you want to spend doing so or you can spend doing so, right? And you go both axises. So let's start on the on the easy side, which is small data, small compute,

right? you have uh just reasonable amount of data can be sitting on your laptop and you just want to get some insight about it and and this model is basically what duct was born like that was meant to do it's a tool you can use it in your python that's why it's embedded you can use it in your program wherever you want and it will work fantastically but even here if you connect it with some cloud-based over offering you get some benefits like uh if you would think you have kit kit is

works greatly on your laptop and And you have GitHub which typically will help you back up your codebase and allow to collaborate on it, supply some authorization and control systems and so forth and so forth. So that's the easy one and let's go one up and say okay but I have lots of data and I want to use it with but I don't have a lot of comput needs. Maybe I'm doing something super small like even a simple query like how many records do I have that match a certain criteria and it turns out the

duct DB is also pretty good there too as it is. Right? It can as I said scan a park file and a string and give you a great answer. But even in those cases if you run it on your laptop then you need to reach out of the network and network into the AWS systems or wherever you are and read the data. But if you connect it with a ductb in the cloud that means that aggregation or that scan can be done much more quickly and very close to the data and you only need to download the summary. So that is something that

Modak will automatically do for you if you use Modduck enabled which we'll get to how in a second. So going to the next one. Uh what happens if you have not not a lot of data but you do need to do quite a huge uh computation for some whatever reason right maybe it is uh um a very heavy recursive CTE that needs to kind of crunch and crunch and crunch and result itself to something or very very loud join or maybe you just need to do it as quickly as you can because your latency requirements are are very low so

you need to get a very quick answer and you want all the data to be in memory uh at that point yeah you can use one of those beef beefy machines. And then again, it's no secret that the cloud allows you to spin it up, use it and move uh when you need it and remove it when you don't need it anymore and becomes much much more cost effective. again uh we will do it for you and I think there is another reason why you would like big compute and that's not necessarily because uh your actual

compute is big but you just want to do it many many times concurrently right or say you have a whole bunch or if you all will look at a certain uh data sets and will try to do something concurrently then whatever the computation it is needs to be done now I don't know how many people are in the room but let's say 100 times so because of that reason you will have uh quite quite high compute needs. And the nice thing is about uh using duct DB which is a very light lightweight operation is we can

actually now give each specific end user its own duct DB in the cloud which we call duckling right so our lightweight oxation is able to spin up on demand uh a back end for each of you guys and as soon as you stop using it it will go away and everything is fine. So that's how we deal with kind of the the scale through a website access or multiple user using things concurrently. And finally um the the biggest have lots of data and you need lots of compute to process it and and I think the the question is here

is also a little bit to uh what exactly what you're trying to do. Uh as we said before these huge machines can do quite a quite a lot right. Uh it also it's much more efficient to run on them. So that that might give you the gains that you need. You want closer and the nice thing about ductb uh ductb the ductb ecosystem that they now have a new data lake format and architecture called duck lake. I'm not going to go in there just want to shout out that next mind our CEO is also giving a talk about that. So if

you want to go go on bone but then mother duck offer that type of uh integration as well. So we also have solution for that much bigger bigger scale if you happen to know to need it. So with that in mind uh let's go uh a little bit about the the the lower level and architecture. This is actual screenshot from our internal mirrorboard that says how things are. Uh this is a screenshot of a data region. I'm not going to go into all of those boxes but just to give you a little bit of a taste. Um first uh again I don't know

how much time was spent going into howb works uh but we integrate into it through an extension mechanism. uh at the top top line you can see how normal ductb query life cycle goes it will parse it it will bind it that means figure out which tables what fields and so forth then we'll figure out how to run the query and optimize it and finally it will go and run it we extend each one of those phases uh um with new functionality so the binding needs to know about the cloud tables the optimizer need to decide basically what

runs where right so we have the native ductb optimization decides how to run effectively a query if you're close to the data but we can split the query and decide okay this part of the filtering we're going to push up to the cloud do the aggregation download it and then do the join with some local data set for example and then of course the actual execution which needs to run in in in this two dual mode part in the cloud part locally again I think they can go we can spend a whole talk there but just

realize that we hook into all these faces um and then finally going level up to what does it mean to have a a cloud system So typically cloud is separate into a compute layer and a storage layer and touch both of this. So for the lightweight compute that we have first of all we enjoy the fact we're a single node and duct DB is so fast to start up right. So our goal for uh time to an answer for a query is 100 millisecond and if that query is very light it will also return and around that that the

time cold start later will be less like depends on what the query execution time is. uh while it's up as we said uh we enjoy the efficiency of the DB itself and being a single node and also because it's so light to start up that also means that we can shut it down very aggressively so that makes it cost effective and the last point is um this is again a quite big topic but in distributed system one of the challenges you have is to figure out how much resources to get give each user and to make sure that no

user dominates the whole system because we are using a single node we completely outsources to the container orchestration system. So every database is completely contained and we don't have to worry about it. But >> we're out of time. Sorry to run the next class. We have time for one question. >> Yes, one question. >> Any question? >> How much the how much of the uh is mother duck contributing back to DB? >> Yeah. So we have engineers that write code for DB. Most of the contribution that we do

is through through subscription to their to their work and guiding them together. So our engineers typically open PR when something small but if it's a bigger item we will work together with DBS to develop it. >> Okay. Awesome. Give it a round of applause. Again reminder 3 is due on Sunday. Please do the practice exam and then as you said the mother duck talk on Duck Lake will be on Monday after class uh next week. Okay. All right guys have a good weekend. Hit it fast money [music] acquats

[music] [music] over the [music] fortune [ __ ] maintain flow with the brain. for [music] [ __ ] maintain flow with the bra.

