[music] [music] I'm still associate [music] [music] today. Again, round of applause. We need your cash. Um, I should have asked you before. How's your money situation? >> Uh, it's getting better. It's getting better. >> It's getting better. Okay. Uh, I mean, again, we pay you here. I know your your your radio show doesn't pay you, but still do you still do gigs, but private party stuff? >> Here and there. >> So, um, why do you want money so bad? >> Yeah. Um, so I had, uh, I had some

crypto scheme going on. >> Okay. That's super. >> Yeah. >> Yeah. >> Do you lose all your money on that? >> Just recouping. >> All right. That's all right. Blockchain and crypto is a scam. Blockchain is a terrible implementation of our database. We'll see that after uh the fall break when we talk about transactions. Uh don't do that. Oh, that's his problem. Whatever. All right. Um for you guys in the class again, next class, this room, same time, we'll be having the the

midterm exam. The again the study guide is online the materials online on piaza I everything all the notes are posted homework three solutions went out um this morning uh so you can check that as well uh you need to bring your simu ID if you want to do log rhythms you can't do in your head bring a simple calculator your phone is fine uh and then a single page double-sided handwritten notes again the idea here is again forcing you to like look through the material and write down what you think is important rather than just

trying to like take every single slide and make it a micro fish and try to shrink it down as small as possible. Yes. In the back. >> Yeah. If you use a basic calculator phone, that's fine. Yes. Because most people don't have a regular calculator these days. Um and then because my office hours are after class on Wednesday. Plus, I I I got to go travel. Uh I moved my office hours to be tomorrow uh in in the afternoon at 4:15. I'll post those in PSO as well. Okay. So, at least you want to talk to me, you

talk to me before the midterm. Any questions about the midterm? Again, it's chapters or the lectures 1 to 11 inclusive. So today's lecture and joins is obviously not going to be on on the exam. All right. And then project two is out. The recitation for that will be also Wednesday after the midterm because I assume no one's going to look at it until uh till till after midterm. So that'll be 8 o'clock this Wednesday on Zoom. Uh and then we'll we'll post materials afterwards on Pata. Yes.

The question is is is the is the real exam going to be like the practice exam where the questions are all what sorry >> yes roughly multiple choice but some of them you you could if if the some of them will be if the multiple choice question isn't there you can then fill in something else be it'll look like that okay all right again if you can't get up about databases uh if you're addicted like I am uh can we have much more database talks coming up today's talk will be uh at 4:30 p.m. on Zoom. That'll

be from the the co-founder of Motherdoc. Guy also was a engineering director at single store and prior to that he was also engineering director or lead d developer at uh Google working on bigquery. uh and sort of the story of mother doc conductbs from this guy's perspective which I agree with in some ways that instead of building this massively distributed uh database system you can if you make the single node be as efficient as possible then that that can take you pretty far so mother dog is sort of pushing that

story then next week we'll have the the spyrob guys give a talk about vortex vortex is a replacement for parquet um and then after that will be the guys from columnar these are people that used to work on uh or do work on Apache arrow which is something we'll we'll talk about when we talk about distributed systems but it's basically it's an in-memory representation of data sort of like parquets for for files on disk arrow [snorts] is for in-memory stuff so you want to pass data between different

systems they speak arrow they're compatible and so columnar is a commercial uh sort of expansion of the project okay all right so today's lecture is awesome because because it's about joins and this is going to be for single node systems like duckb this is where most of the time is going to be spent running your queries when you go distributed mean the shuffle operator which we'll cover that later uh but on single node systems joins is the most expensive thing so we want to see what we can do

to speed that up so last class we talked about how to handle sorting and we again we made this emphasis on that if the database can't the data doesn't fit in memory the data you want to sort doesn't fit in memory then you would use a technique like external merge sort to allow you to write sequential files out the disk read squunch files back in and still uh perform the the sort operation and the highle design pattern that we're going to that we took took advantage of in sorting and we'll take advantage of

today again in joins is this divide and conquer approach taking a large problem breaking up to smaller sub problems solving those each individually as efficiently as possible and then putting result back together right and the way that the two-level strategies we're going to use for both sorting and hashing and aggregations that we saw at the end of last class as well is is is either sorting or hashing. The nest loop join would be like the dumbest thing you could do because it's just for loops.

But with sorting and hashing again these these are a bit more sophisticated uh and under the right conditions can do much better than you know bunch of nested for loops. All right so sort of goes without saying because you did homework one uh about why we would need need to join. This will be the one slide that I pretty much only mention normal forms this entire class entire semester. Um we used to teach it in in the older versions of this course the normal forms and Armstrong's axioms and all this stuff

but like in the real world nobody uses them uh and if you just use like uh you know you write something in Ruben rails or Django or pick your favorite uh object relational map or OM you basically end up on third normal form and that's good enough. I just I just want to mention this that these normal form things exist. You don't need to worry about them. uh and then if you only end up building a query optimizer or do other more sophisticated things you may have to care about in the real world you don't need to know that it's

basically just saying that it's a way to break up your your tables into smaller tables or combine them based on some properties you may care about so first normal form would be like if I take my database of all my students enrolled in classes and their grades I can put that in one giant table with all the columns put together that's called first normal form and obviously that's be very inefficient because it's duplicating a lot of data so you start breaking them out to like the students table, the

enrolled table and the course table, right? That ends up being in in a higher normal form. And it sort of it's a naturally way to represent data. So the reason why we need to do join is that if you start breaking your tables up from the first normal form with just one giant universal table into these separate tables, then I want to put them back together to get back the original data. That's what the joins are going to do for us. And so we want to have a joint operator in our system that can

reconstruct us back to the the original data that we want without losing anything. Seems sort of obvious, but that that's that's what we care about. So the join algorithms we're going to focus on in this class today and this semester are going to be doing what are called equins or inner joins. uh and we're going to do do this on doing binary operators meaning taking two tables and joining them together because this is going to be the most common join uh operator that'll be executed or used

in a database system right taking two tables just joining them together based on something equals something from something in the first table equals something in the second table that's the most common thing and that's what we want to focus on right and then we can tweak these the basic algorithms we'll talk about today to handle other things like left outer joins or full outer joins or uh uh uh doing like anti- joins or like I want to see something doesn't equal something something is not in the

table join those together. So all the algorithms we'll talk today can be used for handling these other type of joins. They're called like theta joins but again we don't we don't need to worry about that. There are algorithms to do what are called multi-way joins. So if I have more than two tables in my query that I want to join together. There are some algorithms that can try to join them all at once. Uh but typically this is very hard to do. Microsoft had this in SQL Server in 1998, but then they

took it out three years later in 2001 because the performance was was not that great. Sometimes be really fast and sometimes it'd be actually worse than doing a simple binary join. So most data systems you know about Postgress, Oracle, my SQL, pick your favorite, they're going to be doing binary joins, taking two tables and joining them together. There's another class of algorithms or modern variants of these multi-way joins called worst case optimal joins. We're not going to cover

that this semester. You don't need enough of this class, but these are algorithms that can do like three-way joins very efficiently. And this is useful when you're like doing graph traversals in a relational database because when you join two tables, the size of the output of the join is be much much larger than the original inputs and then you do another join to reduce it down further. Uh think like doing a bunch of self joins. So we'll cover worst case optimal joins in the advanced class. Um most systems don't

actually support this. the relational AI guys that uh came a few weeks ago. They're one of the systems that support this. The Germans support this, but most of the pretty much all the commercial systems don't do this. So, we don't need to worry about that. All right. So, in general, the rule of thumb we're going to have in all our join algorithms that we talk about today is that we're going to have we're going to have two tables, right? We'll have the left table and the right table, the

inner table and the outer table. And we're always going to want the the smaller table of the of the two tables we want to join. We want to put put that as part of the outer table in our query plan. And we're not about query optimization just yet. We'll talk about this after the the fall break. But it's the database systems query optimizer to figure out which of the two tables are smaller and make sure we put these things in the right order. And again, these algorithms today again

are binary join algorithms. So taking two tables, join together. If I have more than two tables I want to join in my my query plan or my query, then the optimizer also can try to figure out what the order I I want to do the join. So I join A and B first followed by C or B and C first followed by A. And the way it's going to try to figure this out is based on some statistics that it's going to collect about the database system about about these tables to try to make you know uh educated guesses on on the

right way to execute things. But again for for this class today we don't need to worry about we're we're really focused on what's the hour we're going to use to join the tables together. All right. So we saw this query plan last time, right? And we said that the the representation of a query plan is basically going to be either tree or a DAG. And a tree is is a is a subset of a DAG. But the idea is that we have data at the bottom from our our our source in uh source data for like tables or files

or whatever it is. We're going to be feeding that up into the query planner to other for other operators to do whatever it is the computation they want to do and then produce a final output that's in the route that we then send out to whoever's requested it either a client or writing it to another table whatever you want right and so the again the we'll discuss after the fall break we'll discuss how to you know what this data is going to look like you know is it is it going to be a

single tub or batch of tubles and so forth and again we'll worry about that later but for today's for for today's discussion we need to talk about what the output of these joint operator is going to look like and then how we're going to determine whether one algorithm is going to be better than another right how's the data set going to say I want to use a sort merge join over over a hash join and again that's going to then feed into the optimizer when it's try it you know try to then figure out oh I

want to join table RNS I want to use this algorithm I use that algorithm but for us today we're not worried about that decision yet we just want to know is how to determine detine whether one algorithm is going to be better than another. So for the first one the output the again when we do a join the the the basic idea is they're taking a table from taking from from one table and tuple from the other table that are getting matched on some join key and I want to then mash them together into a

uh into a single new output tupil right and so what this output's going to look like is going to depend on a bunch of different factors of how we're actually implement our system but we already saw a little bit of this last class when we talked about the difference early materialization and late materialization. And now again we talk about sorting but now in the context of joins this is going to matter because because now we're going to assume the data that's coming out of our join operator is going

to be used by another operator in our query plan or produces the final output. So we need to decide what this should look like and how do we pass data along or whether to pass data along or not. So again early materialization is that the idea is that the all the data we're going to need to do the join or anything else in in the query plan is going to be given to us or fed up to us from from the bottom in in the leaf nodes. Right? So now if I'm joining table tupils from RNS the the output tupil again is going

to be concatenation of all the tupils from R sorry all the attributes from R all the attributes from S and then we'll just mash them together and stitch them together like this. Right? So that's what that's what'll get passed up uh as we do this after we do this join. So I'm feeding tubles up from R, feeding tubles up from S. Then I do a filter, but then I if I match them on the join key where R ID equals SID, the output result is going to be again all the columns R for all the columns S stitched together.

And so the advantage of getting earlyization is that we never have to go back to our base tables RNS to go get more data because everything's being passed up to us from from the leaves. [clears throat] And then recall that late materialization is that instead of passing up data, we're actually just going to pass up the record ID. And then the bare minimum we need to actually do to do the joint. Maybe it's the columns that are being used in in the join uh the join predicate join expression. So

in this case here, I have the RD and then the SID because that's what I'm trying to uh join on in my my on clause in my query. And then instead of having all the extra attributes for both these two tupils or for these two tables, I'm just gonna have the record ID. and then I do my join mash these two guys together and then that's what gets passed up and then now with late materialization uh the problem is or the challenge is going to be that at some later point in my query plan I need

another attribute from table s and that's not going to be passed along in the tupil that's coming as part of my output of my join I got to again go down make a call down to whatever this base table is and go get that get that data right so the advantage of this in the context of column stores where joins are are uh not saying they're they're they're not that it's not that they're more common than OLAP queries, but sorry in the OTP workloads, but in OLAP queries, you you

usually end up joining more tables than you would in an OOLTP system. So again, in the column store system, I didn't have to go read the the data from the other columns that I didn't need for to do my join. And furthermore, if I my join is very uh selective, meaning I'm throwing away a lot of tupils because they're not matching my join clause, then I'm going to have a win because the number of tuples I'm going be passing up is quite small. Then who cares if I have to go then fetch the remaining data that

I need from the columns that I didn't pass up because, you know, the these guys down here could have been a billion tupils, but I ended up with two after the join. And so therefore, it's not not a lot of data I have to go read to go go complete the query. Again, the main thing to understand from the join algorithm is that we're going to take attributes from the from the from one table, attributes from the other table, and they'll get mashed together. And you'll have to pass along the join

key in order that to compute that join. But the whether or not you pass along the other attributes depends on the the system whether you're implementing late materialization or or early materialization. All right. The other thing we need to do again to determine whether one algorithm is better than another is is the cost. So unlike in uh I guess your algorithms class it's usually like you know uh complexity defined in terms of like the number of times I have to do a certain operation um you know in the actual

computation itself. For us when we do joins in this class we're going to focus on the amount of IO I have to use for both reading and writing data. If I had to spill things at disk and write it back out I got to keep track of those costs. And if I got to read it back in I got to keep those costs as well. Right? And we saw this again with the sort merge algorithm from last class. So for today's lecture, we're going to assume that we're going to be joining tables RN and S. And we'll say that for table R,

it's going to have big M pages in the table and a total of little M tupils in in the table. And then we'll have the same thing for S with big N for the number number of pages and little N for the uh the number of tupils. Right? For this class here, again, we're only focusing on disio because that's going to be the slowest thing for us. Therefore, we're going to ignore the cost of actually doing the actual join itself. Like if you build a hash table, we're ignoring that cost. We have to

probe the hash table. We ignore that cost. We last class we talked about comparing keys in the sort algorithm. We'll ignore that cost as well because the dis IO is going to be super expensive. We're also going to assume that everything's going to fit on a single machine and therefore we are not worried about sending data over the network. when we talk about distributed databases then that all comes back the network cost come become a big part of it the cost right because now you may be

sending things across the world and that's super expensive uh again for for this class here we're just going to focus on on dis IO's so the for all these documents as well we're also going to ignore the the cost of the output of the operators because they're going to be the same for for one algorithm to the next right because I have my say my hash join algorithm and and S loop joint algorithm they're all going to produce the same logically the same logical result might be sorted in a

different order but again relational model is unsorted so that's okay but the number of tupils going to be passing up is going to the same so we we ignore that cost as well all right so the I sort of already said this but obvious as well like again the the the inner join is the most the most common thing we want to do uh common join operator we want to do in our database systems so we're going to spend a lot of time to make that as efficient as possible. And that's what this class is all about. Sometimes you see some

systems also support cross joins. There's not really much you can do to make these things work efficiently because it's just two stupid for loops. You're just taking all the tuples from one table and mashing together with all the tubs from the other table. Building a hash table or sorting things ahead of time doesn't doesn't help you in any way. You obviously can can batch things to reduce number of times you got to go back and fetch data, but in the end of the day, there really isn't anything you

can make that work really efficiently. So again, we're we're just going to focus on doing the the inner joins because that's that's again that's the most common thing and that there we can do some techniques and some tricks to make things run faster. All right, so here's the menu for today. We're going to go through the most basic alged loop join. This is what most people build first when you build a database system that needs to support joins. We'll talk about three different

variants of this. Then we'll spend a little time talking about the sort merge join. Uh but then we'll spend most of our time talking about how to do hash joins because hash joins are going to be the most important joint operator you can have in your system. Um and this will be what you if you want your joins to run fast, you'd want to build this first before server join, right? All right. So let's look at what I'll call a naive nestloop join. Uh and this is sort of a way of like this is a straw

man to say why you know here's here's a a bad way to do a join and then we'll see how to we'll see how to build upon this and make this run faster. Right? So we're going to join table RNS. It's called nested loop join because the actual implementation of this algorithm is just a bunch of nested for loops. Right? So for every single tupil in the in in R going to go get every single tupil in S check to see whether our join keys match. If yes then emit it as part of our output.

So the parlance we'll use or sorry the vernacular we'll use for uh when we talk about joins is the inner table and outer tables and this comes from this these nested nested uh for loops right so we'll say the the outermost for loop is called the outer table and the inner one the one in the middle is called the inner table. So even though people um even for like a hash joint algorithm sometimes you know it's not going to be doing nest of for loops but people still maybe refer to these things as the outer

table and the inner table and in most most diagrams of query plans the outer's on the left the inner's on the right some systems I think snowflake reverses it right just it's it's there's not like a specific term like specific uh way say like within a diagram this is definitely going to be the inner versus the outer you different systems for whatever and do different things in their in their uh in their um visualizations of query plans. So again, I've already said before I I already said this just now

like this is bad. Don't do this. Why is it bad? Why is it stupid? >> What's that? >> It says it's quadratic. Yes. >> The IO. Absolutely. Yes. So this is like stupidly naive, right? This is just saying for every single tup in R just scan S in its entirety. uh get get all you know go get every single tupil in every single page read it again and then get the next tupil in the outer table in R and do the exact same scan all over again right it's naively stupid and it's super expensive

so in this case here would be the cost me big M plus so the big M is for the the scanning the all the pages in the outer table and then for all the tupils in the outer table I got to scan all the pages of the inner table so little m is all the tupils in the outer table and then big n is all the pages in the inner table. Right? So if you just put some numbers to this, you'll see how terrible this actually is. Again, this is like the dumbest thing you could ever actually do. Right? So if our table is kind of small, right?

It has uh a thousand pages in R with 100,000 tupils and 500 pages in S with 40,000 tupils. If we didn't plug and chug our numbers in, uh, we end up with us having to do 50 million IO's. And if we actually put a wall clock time to say how much is the cost for a given, you know, for one IO, right? This is running on SSD in a local box, it's, you know, uh, 100 milliseconds is is reasonable. It's slow, but it's, you know, it's it's a ballpark number, right? Just joining these two tables. If you just go fetch

every single page and ignoring like hardware caching or OS caching, anything just if I have to go pay the cost of going every fetch every single page for the outer table, sorry, the inner table for every single tuple in the outer table, it'll take 1.3 hours. All right. So remember I said before that in in general we always want to put the smaller table as the outer table. So in this case here the smaller table is is S. has fewer fewer pages and fewer tupils. So if I just switch the order of

them, right, and now plug and chug, I got the time down to 1.1 hours. So, you know, I saved what, 20 minutes, but it's still not that great. So in my example here, the table is these two tables are ridiculously small. Assuming I'm doing 4 kilobyte pages, then the size of this this one example here is 6 megabytes. like that'll sit in easily in your L3 cache. You don't have to go to disk, right? You could easily do this join entirely in CPU cache land and that's going be really fast. But if I have to

go pay that disio cost if I'm naively going getting every page in of the inner table for every tuple in the outer table, it's going to be horribly horribly slow. So this is like the dumbest thing you can do. Uh but let's see how we can actually make this a little bit better. So one simple thing is to do what's called a block of loop join. And this is again because we know our our tupils are not just sitting by themselves on disk. They're in pages with other tupils that they're friends with. Then when we go

fetch a page, we want to do as much processing with all the tupils in that page before we move on to the next page. So we just change now our two nested for loops to be four nested for loops. uh where for every single block in the outer table, go get a block on the inner table and then every single tupole in a block on the outer table do the join against all the tupils in the inner table. Uh then we can do a little bit better here, right? So now our cost is going to be m plus big m times little n. Again, big m is

the cost of scanning all the the pages in the outer table. But now for every single page for every single one of those pages in the outer table now we're doing a scan of all the pages on the inner table rather than doing it on a per tupal basis now our cost can be uh reduced quite significantly right so again this question yes >> this question is for every single big m pages in the outer table scan all the pages in the inner table. Yes. >> Yes. >> So it's not as >> the statement is and they're correct

that it's not asmtoically better. It's just in practice the constants are better. Yes, I said this earlier constants matter in database world. So again, we want the smaller table to be always on the outer table. And we would determine whether which one's smaller than the other. Not based on the number of tupils, but rather based on the number of pages because that's the main cost for us of going going to disk. It's going fetching pages, not going fetching individual tupils. [cough]

[clears throat] And obviously in this scenario here, I'm assuming I have only two buffer pages, bufferable pages to store data. In a real system, you would have a lot more, right? So in this case here, you want to try to store in a sort of in a in a block nest loop join where you have multiple pages you can use to store the data as you scan it. You want to put as many buffers from the outer table in in memory as possible and then just leave one page for the input uh for the inner table to bring one page in and then

another page to write the output after you do the join, right? So it basically looks like this. Now for every single for B minus two pages, B is the total number of bufferable pages I have. Scan all the data I can from R and then go fetch each indiv page from S and then just do that again do that scan of the the joint of the tupils uh in the two inner for loops. Yes. >> The statement is I could emit also uh B minus two uh >> pages of data >> pages of data but like I can only in

this sort of simplistic example I'm going to fill up one page write that out then fill the next one up. >> Yeah. Yeah. You do asynchronous IO and therefore you need more P. Yeah. Keep it simple. Yes. All right. So we go back now to our our formula. Assuming we have B minus two pages for scanning the the outer table. Now our cost is going to be big M which is again scanning the outer table at least once. Um, and then I can get for every single for every m divided by b minus 2 and take the the ceiling of that

for all those sort of batches of of pages on the outer table. I got to scan all the pages on on the inner table and then plugging chugging now with our with our simple formulas we had before. uh assuming that you know we have uh you know if everything can fit in memory we can get this down now to do to our uh the join of RNS from our simple example before down to 05 seconds so 150 milliseconds. So just by batching things up and having taking advantage of the memory that's available to us in the buffer pool, we

went from 1.1 hours to less than a second. >> Why is it n plus n? Sorry. Um well because everything fit fits in memory then I I read it all once everything fits in memory and then I join it. Why is it not the constant above? Because the the ceiling m divided by b minus two that's if like if I'm sort of have a batch where I'm reading things in and then for that batch of the outer table scan the inner table. If I can fit all the if all the pages from the outer table and the inner table fit memory

just scan it all. That's the m and the n add it together and then do the join on that. So what I'm trying to point out here is even though the um the the nested loop join seems kind of brain dead and stupid uh if everything fits in memory and maybe everything's already is in memory this is actually pretty fast right and we'll see when we talk about hash joins there maybe cases where you do some of some of the join will be done using the hash with it building a hash table, but the other other a small

portion of it could be used using this sort of inmemory nested loop join because you can rip through it pretty fast. So now if I only have B minus or B equals 102, uh then I can get this down to um 6,000 IO's. Uh so about 600 600 milliseconds. Uh, but then if I again switch the outer, the inner one, make sure the the outer table is is the big is the smaller one, then I can get it down to 5,500. Yes. It's not just that whether you get to use your >> Yeah. Their statement is and they're

correct that if everything fits in memory, is it just the naivveness of loop join? Yes. And if everything's to memory, that's fine. Uh and so when we talk about the hash joint, the one of the approaches will be will be to one of the approaches will divide and conquer. We'll split things up such a way that we can maybe try to keep everything in memory and then the naive nest nested loop join will be will work the best. If I have to go to disk, it's terrible. If everything's in memory,

then I'm great. All right. So, why is this so bad? Because we already said this again. If I had to go from disk, then I'm basically doing scruncher scan over and over again on the inner table to try to match things from from the outer table. So you may say all right well sequential scans are not great I we we spend a time bunch of time learning about indexes if I have an index can can I take advantage of that to make my so that inner for loop on the on the inner table make that go faster the answer is yes we can do

this some systems like server we talked about before will if you're doing a join or any kind of operation on a table and if it the optimizer realizes hey it'd be really nice if I had an index for this uh for this table make my queries run make my query go faster it'll build that index for you do whatever it is the operation you want to do in your query and then immediately just throw it away and then also give you back warnings and say hey look I keep building this index or this table for your queries be really

nice if you tell me I can have it you know for good and keep it around and then the human has to decide whether to do that or not all right so if you have an existing index then you you can modify the the nested loop join algorithm to do what's called an index nestl loop join algorithm right and it basically is now the the the the the outer table you're still scanning through all the tupils. Then for the inner table, I'm going to take a key that I extract from the outer outer table tupil and then do a probe

into whatever the index it is that I have available to me and then see whether I have a match and that's essentially doing you know doing the join for you. So the cost for this is hard to define because it's obviously going to depend on what your index is what data structure it actually is and the size of it. So in general though we would say the cost now is going to be big M because again we always have to scan all the pages in the outer table and then for every single tupil in the inner

table sorry every single tupil in the outer table we'll do some kind of probe into this index uh to to again find a match and again we can't define this C easily because you know in this class here because it's going to depend on a bunch of different factors that can vary from one index to the next right whether it's a B+ tree or skip list or try or hashable right but this basically what the hash join is going to do right so in this case here assuming I have a a B+ tree I can I could probe in

that and use that make a nested loop for nested loop join index nested loop join the hash join basically says I don't have an index so let me build a hash table now and then do the same kind of probe like this and then throw it away when when the quer is done the same way that SQL server does okay all right so the The main takeaways for the uh the nest loop join if everything's in memory it's going be super fast and that's going to be actually preferable in many cases. Uh but in general if you have to go we know

we have to go read from disk then I'm going to want to make sure the smaller table is always going to be the outside. Try to batch as much as I can on that outer table uh as as I can in my buffer pool because that'll make things go up make things run faster. Okay, so the the next algorithm we're going to talk about is again sort merge join and this is going to be built upon the external merge sort or that sorting stuff we tal talked about last class and as I said before the for since the 1970s

it was this back and forth between uh in the in the research literature about whether sorting algorithms were better than uh hashbased algorithms and originally sorting was faster because the computers are really slow and hashing was really expensive. And then hashing algorithms got better, but then the hardware got better and sorting got better. It keeps going back and forth. Then in general, the the hash join is be preferable over the sort merge join, but you'd want to still want to have a sort merge join. Uh because if

your query is the data is already sorted on your join key or there's an order by clause where you need to sort the data, you can you can kill two birds with one stone by doing this algorithm and producing results that are that are sorted for you. All right. So sort merge join has two phases and again the confusing thing about this is that last time we tal we talked about the external merge sort algorithm uh and we're going to use that external merge sort in our we can use external merge sort for our sort merge joint

algorithm and we use external merge sort as the sort phase in our join algorithm and then the merge phase in the sort al the join algorithm is different than the merge phase in the sort algorithm right I'm I'm not I'm not trying to confuse I'm trying to say like we can still use this external merge sort which has its own two phases in our join algorithm which is going to have its own other two phases right all right so the basic idea is that we have our two tables that we want to join

and we're going to sort them based on our join keys and then we're going to have and that's what you do in the first phase then the second phase you have these cursors that going to walk through your sorted tables and start comparing across to see whether you have a match and if you do then you you you emit them as part of the join output and then you just keep moving the cursors forward uh marching through uh and producing results and the advantage because the data is being sorted at least in the

outer table you know you won't have to sorry yeah the outer table you won't have to backtrack up in the sort in the sort of results to look at tupils over and over again in the inner table you may still have to do that but again it's simple trick to keep keep uh track of these things but the sorting allows us to identify that we know there isn't going to be any match at some prior point in the in the table. Once we reach uh a certain certain certain point in with our cursor because the data sort of

we we can't see magically a value that that you know should appear up above down below us >> in the back. Yes. >> The question is can I play an example where we have to backtrack? Yes. Let me give a demonstration. Yes. All right. Let me just skip this. This is the algorithm. Again, I don't like to show code in class, but basically there's two cursors. You scan through till you reach the end. And then there's logic to say whether you uh whether you whether one increments versus the other

and whether you need to backtrack. Let's go through an actual example. So here here we have our two tables. We want to join the RNS. And so the first phase of the sort merge join algorithm is to just sort them. So we want to join on the ID column. So in both these tables, we're just going to go ahead and sort them. Then now when we enter the second phase to do our merge, we're gonna have these two cursors that start at the beginning of the two sorted tables and start again start comparing with each other on the

join key to set see whether we have a match. And to handle backtracking, we're also going to keep track of this last value that says here's the last value I saw when uh you know as my cursor on the inner table moves down. So that way if we then see a uh if we then see a join key on the outer table that could have matched something up above in our inner table, we know how to go back and go and start the scan on that again. All right. So we start at the very beginning both two cursors are pointing

to the first tupil. The join key is based on ID. So in this case here 100 equals 100. So this is a match. And we just produce our output like that by just again matching the two tupils. uh the attributes in the two tables together. Now in this case here because we have now a match we're going to just move the inner tables cursor down by one and we leave the outer tables cursor where it is. Then now we do a comparison 100 equals 100. We have another match and we produce that as an output. And

then now we're going to move down forward again uh in the inner table. But now this point here the value we're looking at is different than the last value we just saw. So we got to record that this is the last value that we saw. So we saw 100 before 200. So we keep track that we have 100. All right. So now at this point here 200 is greater than 100. So we know that we need to move down the outer table's cursor by one because at this point here we there isn't going to be another value

uh on the inner table that that can match with 100 where the outer table is pointing at. So we move the outer table's cursor and not the inner table's cursor. So that comes down here. We have gets 200 again. 200 equals 200. So we have match. We produce our output again. And then we now we move the inner table down. Record that the last value that we saw was 200 because now we're seeing 400. And again 400 is now greater than on the on the inner table. 400 is greater than 200 on the outer table. So we're going

to then move down the outer table's cursor down by one. Now we see 200 again. and we check our last value, we see that, oh, we just saw 200 before we got to 400. So now we know we need to backtrack and move the inner uh the inner table's cursor back up to where 200 was so that we can essentially restart this this process of scanning the data inner table for the new tupil on the outer table. So then now again we have another match on 200. We move the inner table down by one. Now we get 400. This get scans down

we get 300. 300 is less than 400. So, we know we want to move down the outer table cursor because there isn't there isn't something we can match here on the inner table because we're already at 400 because things are sorted. We know that that you we're not magically going to see a 300 later on because it would have appeared before we saw 400 which we didn't we didn't see that. So, we move the outer table down by one. Now, we have match on 400. That's good. Inner table moves down by one. Now, we

have 500. Keep our last value as 400. four five. We're pointing at 500 though. 500 is less than is greater than 400. So the outer table moves down. Now we have 500 again. That's a match. And now the the inner table's cursor reaches the bottom. We still got to keep track of the last value for ourselves. Right? Even though we reached the bottom because we don't know what we're going to see. We we might have another match on the on the on the outer table again. But now we get 600. 600 is less than

sorry 600 is greater than 500. So we know at this point we can short circuit because there isn't anything that that we'll ever see that will match between these these two joins. So we just scan through and just say we're done. Just finish up >> questions. Yes. the second table. >> Yes. And the statement he made and he's correct is that the reason why I'm keeping this last value is because the there may be multiple tupils on the inner table matching with a tupil on the

outer table. Yes. Now you can be smart about it and say oh if I'm doing a join on uh columns where they're they're they're unique column or primary key then I know that I won't have duplicates on the inner table for any match on the outer table. So in that case here you don't need to do any backtracking at all. Right? But in general you may not know be able to know that. Therefore you have to maintain this >> the question. What if there was two 100s? >> So back going back up here. Oh what like

yeah. So in that case here you'd have to keep track of like no. So if you had two so you see first one 100 here. So you do this you would scan through you match that. That's fine. And then now you the the inner table would come down. You have two you would keep track your last value as 100. The outer table moves down. It would see 200. Sorry it would see 100 again. At this point it says oh okay well that was my last value. So let me backtrack the inner table. I don't have to backtrack

on the outer table ever for this. >> David is in the correct like when it backtracks it backtracks to the first 100 where this was. I'm not recording the pointer, but like it would keep track of that. And again, if the worst case scenario, if I only have one value in this column when I'm joining, then I'm backtracking to the very beginning. But again, there's there's there's no algorithm to make that work work. Great. >> Yes. >> Right. I was trying to avoid that. So

David is and he's correct. Uh well, this is an equality predicate like equin. What if it's not that? Then you have to have additional logic to keep track of like uh could I see something based on my join predicate is something going to be above a below me. It's more complicated but yes you'd have to do that >> you like figure out something >> uh the statement of the question is could you figure out something in all cases? What do you mean figure it out? What do you mean

>> figure out some way for all sorts of >> uh the question is could you figure out a way to do sort merge join for all joint condition? Yeah. No, you can do it for all of them. I'm saying the the logic of backtracking is just way more complicated, right? Other questions? That's a nice way to end it. That's nice. Yeah. Good. Okay. So, all right. So, what is our cost for this? Well, again, we have two phases. The sort phase and the merge phase. the sort phase cost is whatever our sort

algorithm is going to be for the both both the two tables. So if I'm again if I'm doing uh like the sort merge join from the last class then it's the 2M times uh everything else there because again b minus one buffer pages. So I have whatever my cost is for sorting those this those two the the two input tables and then now the merge cost without any backtracking is just reading all the pages uh for both the inner table and the outer table once. Backtracking complicates things because

then you but like you'd have to know the distribution of the keys and how many duplicates you're going to have per key. So we we can't obviously put that in our formula here. And those be one of the reoccurring themes when we talk about query optimization. They make a bunch of assumptions what your data looks like because it simplifies simplifies these formulas because otherwise h how could you know? So if I go back to with real numbers again sorting these two tables here assuming I have 100 buffer pool pages

then the sort cost for table R is 4,000 IO's the sort cost for for table S is 2,000 IO's right but then the merge cost is just again scanning of the pages that are sorted once that's down to 1500 IO. So in comp so the total comp cost is now to 7500 IO's. So in the case of the everything's in memory that was 150 milliseconds. Now we're down to 7 we're at 750 milliseconds and then we can still spill to disk if necessary. This is starting to look pretty good. I've already mentioned this now, but the

worst case scenario for us or pretty much all the join algorithms is that there like you have the two tables you're trying to join on, they have one value for all the tupils. In that case, there's there's nothing you can do to make that work well. It's like, you know, the worst case scenario. But in general, data doesn't usually look like that. Now you wouldn't have a billion tubles that everyone you know everyone has a you know the same birthday and you want to join these two tables like that

doesn't happen that often at the at the scale where this you know this would be a huge issue so as I already said join is going to be good for us when the the data is already sorted on the join key that we want or the output of the the the query the final output is has you know there's an order by clause that's also in our join key because again we can just do the sorting uh for either both the join and the final output and uh we don't have to do as a separate step right >> yes

>> yes the question the statement is and they're correct the merge costs come back of uh of n plus n is the best case scenario. Yes, with no backtracking. All right, so let's jump into the good one, the hash join. So the the basic idea is again we have a tupil in in R, we have a tuple in S. We want to join them together. Um, and the idea is that we're going to use the hashing mechanism, the hash function as a way for us to find that we what you know the the matching pupil from one

side versus the other, right? And we can base it on this nice property, the hash functions, is that given the same key, it'll it'll produce the same output, the same hash value. So if my join key is the same as your join key, we want to join together, then we'll end up hashing to the same location in either a hash table or a partition, right? And in the same way when we talk about hash tables of like a way to take a hash, you're sort of randomly jumping into a you know a linear array of of slots where we may

have to look around to find the data we want because it we have to sort of scan through until we find the slot that has the data we want or an empty slot. Uh the idea is the same is that with hashing we'll land in a location where the data that we could have a match if it exists will be nearby and therefore we're not have to do a complete linear scan of all the data or squ scan of all the data as we did in nest for loops. So a basic hash join algorithm on a on a single node has two phases. First phase

we're going to take all the do a sequential scan on the outer table and then build a hash table using some hash function and then uh then the second phase we're going to scan the inner t inner table use that same hash function look up the hash table to see whether we have a match on our join key. So we can use whatever our favorite hash table we we want that we discussed earlier in the semester. In practice, most systems are going to use linear probe hash table because they're so simple and and so

fast. Um, even on a distributed system, uh, it's it's going to work work pretty well. And then inside the hash table, we'll have to at least include the where we at least have to include the join key because again, we may hash to some location that may have an an entry, you know, in in that slot, but we because the hash functions are guaranteed are not guaranteed to have collisions. We have to then do still do a comparison on the join key to say whether we have what match or not. So the basic basic joint algorithm looks

like this. We have two for loops still but they're not nested anymore. They're just separate and ex executed uh in serial order. So the first thing I'm going to do is build you know allocate some memory for some kind of hash table. Scan through the the outer table or what we call the build side of the join. Use a hash function. Populate the hash table. Then do a scrunchial scan on the on the inner table also called the probe side of the join. Scan through probe inside the hash table. See whether we

have a match or not. Right? Pretty basic but works really really well because again it's basically divide and conquer. I'm taking a what otherwise it would have been the sequential scan and narrowing down the the scope amount of data I have to look at because I'll land on my hash table and find the thing that I want. Now, obviously, I want to make sure my hash table is appropriately sized so that I'm not doing the worst case complete sequential scan of all the keys if my hash table's too full. But in

general, this this this is going to work really well. Yes. >> The question is uh what is the difference between this and index nestloop join? Uh nothing at a high level. Index loop join has an existing index and I use that. This is I'm building the hash table just to do the join. Most indexes in real systems aren't going to be hash tables though. Most like if you call create index by default most systems nearly all systems you'll get a you get like a tree a bless tree. And so the bless tree is great.

It's probably my probably is or not is probably it is the most important data structure in the world but it's not going to be the best thing for joins for doing a lot of joins because if I if my hash table is large enough and I don't have a lot of collisions then I'm doing 01 lookups and for a billion tupils that's a big deal right that's going to be a huge difference performance versus the login traversal in a in a B+ tree so one easy optimization we can do to make our hash joins go faster is

to actually build a bloom filter as we're populating the hash table and then now when I want to do my uh my probe I check the bloom filter first if there's a match then I then probe the hash table otherwise I don't probe the hash table right so this is sometimes called sideways information passing some systems will call these bloom joins all right the basic idea is all the name even though it has different names. So say that now I'm I'm going to build my hash table on R, right? This will be the

build side. So as I'm scanning through R, I'm populating the hash table, but then I'm also going to be building bloom filter. And then now once the hash table's done and now I'm going to start scanning S to do the probe into the hash table. I'm basically going to pass along the bloom filter over to this guy and say, "Hey, before you check the hash table, go check the bloom filter." Right? because the idea is that I still have to hash anyway to to probe into the

hash table. Um, but then landing the hash table and then doing the the scan and doing the key comparisons that could be, you know, that can be rather expensive versus doing the bloom filter lookup. That's way faster. So this is great when my my join predicate or my join keys are very selective meaning most of the tuples I'm examining aren't going to match on the join and I'm throwing most of them away then this is going to be a huge win for us because the you know doing a lookup in the bloom filter is

super cheap relative to the hash table. So this is a weird thing for like kind of violates the notion of like in our query plan where we have we're sending data up from one oper because we're taking information that we collect on R and having this side channel thing we pass over to S. But again the win is um is be quite significant like in some in really selective joins this can be like a 2x performance improvement for just building this bloom filter. All right. So, the example I showed

before for the simple hash join was kind of like the naive nest loop joint where like you assume everything's in memory and you and kind of rip through it. But if everything's not in memory, then we need to be able to to still be able to handle that. and we don't want to maybe build a giant hash table for our for for to do our join because the hash table is not going to fit in memory and now we're doing random IO to different locations or different slots in that hash table and that's going to be terrible for us

for performance. So we're going to rely on and again that same divide and conquer approach where we're going to split the the data set we want to join up into smaller subsets and potentially build hash tables for those smaller subsets that do fit in memory and then rip through that uh very efficiently. So this idea goes back to the 1980s. Uh I think the textbook calls these partition hash joins. The sometimes you'll see in the literature they're called grace hash joins. Um, and this is

named after a uh seminal work in the 1980s out of uh out of Japan building this database machine called Grace. And they had a paper saying, "Hey, look, we have this this great database machine called Grace, and here's the hash join we're using." And so the Grace database machine obviously no longer exists, but it's the legacy is this hash join that pretty much everybody uses today. So the like the other algorithms we talked about is have two phases. Have the partition phase. We're going to go

through both tables hash the join keys and then divide it up into uh partitions and buckets. And then in the second phase for each partition level we're going to again scan through the data and just do the simple hash join that resides in memory that we saw before. Who here has heard of the term database machine before? Probably nobody, right? It's basically specialized hardware that people built for for specifically to run database systems. This is why database systems are the most important pieces of software. Think

of like other you know crypto stuff he was doing like other than people building specialized hardware for crypto or maybe like you know graphics and things like that or machine learning people have been building specialized hardware for databases for a long time. So this this is one of the earliest ones from uh one of the early days called IDM. Uh I just like this picture because the guy's like in a suit working on a database. This is what the the future was going to look like. Um, but they

were building specialized hardware to do sorting uh in network uh as well. And this again this was 1980s. That company is obviously no longer there. But there's a bunch of companies around today that'll sell you database appliances instead of calling D called appliances that I don't know customized hardware or tuned hardware to run database uh you know database workloads. Most famous of these is probably going to be Oracle Exodata. Uh and then the the terod data stuff, right? I think of like massive data

warehouses. Each of these one each one of these racks is like $5 million, right? And then maybe double that now, but then you pay a million dollars a year for support for this. Like this is what you would run like for high-end workloads. And inside this on like you know Oracle controls all the hardware and the OS, they'll have like I think FPJs and things like that inside this make run faster, right? Uh one of the companies that be giving a talk with us in a few weeks is called Yellow Brick.

They start off selling a database appliance. Again, think like specialized hardware customized for uh for running a database workload. Um and this is you know they still make a lot of money doing this right like just goes to show people trying to do specialized hardware for data for a long time now. The current trend is see how we can leverage GPUs. Uh there's a bunch of companies that have been doing this for about 10 years now. Uh we had a seminar series in 2018 where a bunch of the database GPU database vendors came and

gave a talk. Um we have obviously they're competing against getting GPUs from the the ML AI people but there's a lot of like you know one generation older GPUs that people don't don't want to use for training anymore for ML stuff that you can still use in databases and run efficiently. We're not going to GPU we're not going to talk about GPU databases in this class. That'll be the advanced class. Uh let's just say that it's people have been trying to do this for a while but it doesn't always pan

out. Part of the reason why the database machines in the 1980s didn't really pan out either is because in the early days of computing like by the time it took you to design specialized hardware fab it and then ship it to customers you know Intel or Motorola or whoever was putting out new CPUs uh there were you know pretty significant jumps in performance because of uh Moore's law and the performance benefit you get from specialized hardware uh just was negated pretty quickly. Nowadays, unless you can

get on Amazon or in the cloud, people don't don't really care about, you know, running specialized hardware because it just you want everything to be uh sort of commoditized. Anyway, it's Grace Hash joining was an early days machine and there's a lot of work done in the space. Um it's the whole it's the it's the whole databases like if I have specialized hardware to run my database system run faster that would be fantastic. No one really has seem to sort of crack that nut yet.

Okay. So the way partition hashing is going to work is sort of like that partitioning phase we saw when we talk about aggregations last class. So, I'm going to scan through all the table, my my my out my outer table, use a hash function, put everything into buckets, right? Scan everything on the inner table. Same thing, put everything in buckets. And then now I'm going to be able to spill these out to disk if my buckets get get too big. But then now when I want to do the sort of the second

phase of do the join, I only need to examine the data within one buckets and do the comparison across the two tables with within one level at a partition because I know that there isn't going to be a key that got hashed into partition zero at the top for R that's going to get hashed into this bottom bucket down here because the hash function doesn't work that way because it's the same hash function, the same value. They'll end up in in the same level. So then now when I want to do my my my

my probe to do the join I'm going to do one level at a time bring those pages into memory build a hashable for that then at the same level read all those uh buckets from the outer table s and then do a hashing into this hash table just again now everything's in memory find my match produce my output and then once I'm done probing on on the s side I throw the hash table away because I don't need it anymore because there's never going to be another match at any other level. And

I just do the same thing all over again. >> Yes. So the question is how do I choose the number of bucks I have and how do I are they just pages they're just pages I'm just appending to them right and then the size is determined by the the database system either through a parameter that you can control as a human like the operator the administrator so you you can tell like Postgress like you're allowed to use one megabyte of memory to do hash joints or something like that right so so someone

is someone is telling you how many pages you get to do this Right. And the and then if if if the system decides that's not going to be enough, you do recursive partitioning. We'll see that next. Right. Memory is finite. So I just can't say I'm going to use all my memory. Something up above is determining how how much resources you have. >> Yes. You could actually buckets. >> The question is how's this producing a correct join? Not not a cle correct join because your statement is because you

could have rows that would that in one one level partition. You're saying match to another level. That can never happen, right? Because if the join key on table R and table S if they're the same values when I hash them same input to the same hash function because it's deterministic will produce the same output. I mod that by the number of or whatever K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K K

K K K K K K K K K K K K here H here, tell me how many how many levels my partitions I have. They're going to end at the same level always. If they don't, then something's wrong with the hardware and you know the data system can't handle that, right? But like I don't it's like it's like the sort merge stuff where like because I've sorted the data I can't I know I can't see something that I should have seen earlier down below because it's been sorted. If my sort algorithm is wrong

then I have a bunch of other problems right? So if my hash function is acting all weird then that's that's you're in trouble. But in general the algorithm will work. >> Yes. So you're asking what if I have I think saying what if all the what if these buckets get too full? Yes. Next slide. Okay. So if the partitions don't fit in memory which they were asking about then I just recursively partitions again and I keep and again if everything still doesn't fit in all memory I partition again. Now

again in the degenerative case if all the values are the same across all my keys or all my my tupils then recursively partitioning doesn't do anything for us but again don't do that there's but there's there's end of the day there's nothing you can do there's no algorithm magic to make make that go away so eventually I'm just going to keep subpartitioning my partitions until they fit in memory and then do and then do my joint. In practice, you only have to do uh one extra level of recursive

partitioning in real systems. Uh again, if it's the generative case, there's nothing you can do. Uh but then if you identify that the that you're going to have a lot of keys that that are going to be uh that values of the keys are going to be the same, then you just fall back to do the block block nested loop join. Or if my partitions are actually going to be small enough, I don't maybe want to build the hash table. we'll see in a second. I'll just do the uh I'll just do

the in-memory nested loop join because that's going be really fast to do as well. So let's say we we this is the table we want to partition, right? We we have a bunch of buckets k minus one and then say for whatever reason the a bunch of the the keys are going to are hashing into this this uh the bucket in level one. So I'm think of this like just every single time the the the page gets full, I read out the disc, I make another page. So I'm keeping track of the metadata of how many pages I have at

each level. So there's some threshold to say, okay, this thing is getting too full. Everything is is too skewed. So then now I'm going to do another hash round of hashing. Pick another hash function or take another seed for the hash function I'm using and just uh partition the data at that level all over again into a bunch of more pages or bunch more buckets. And then for the ones that didn't that weren't too full, I just carry them along at the next phase because I don't need to

repartition them. I don't I don't care about them. So then now as I do my scan uh the same scan on the outer table, sorry, the inner table, if they hash to the the two bottom ones, that's fine. I don't think anything special there. And then now I just do my inmemory hash join as I did before. But if I recognize that if I'm hashing to one of these ones that that got overflowed, then I know that I need to call the second hash function to hash them again. And then now they'll land up

and align with the the keys coming from the outer table. So just like the index probe cost in index loop join is hard to quantify, recursive partitioning is also hard to quantify because it depends on the key distribution. Right? So in general, we're just going to say to estimate the cost of hash joins is going to be this formula here. So three times n plusn, right? Because it's one scan in uh for n plusn uh write it out and then one scan back back in to take the partitioned uh buckets and then do the hash joint and

everything's in memory at that point. So using real numbers now we can get the our example table before down to 450 milliseconds. So sort merge join was 750 milliseconds. Inmemory nested loop join was 150 milliseconds. Um but if I had to spill the disc in this case here I can get it down to 450. So that's pretty good. So one semieas but not always not always easy easy to implement difficult to get right optimization is use what is called a hybrid hash join and this was something that was invented early 1980s as an

extension to the grace hash join stuff and this was invented by the other data professor Janesh Patel's his PG advisor invented this uh I think with Jim Gray one of the touring award winners in databases you know back in the day and so basically what happens is if you recognize that a bunch of the data. Uh if your your data is skewed and a bunch of the um a bunch bunch of the the tupils are all going to the same partition, you'll just keep that partition in memory, spill all the other ones out to disk and then uh just do an

Mory hash join or Mory nested loop join for that hot partition and then just do the regular grace hash join uh algorithm for the other other partitions. Right? Right. So again, assume we have for whatever reason all the keys are hashing this one here. Right? So I would recognize, okay, this thing's to be hot. So I don't want to maybe spill the disc. If it's not that big and I can keep it in memory, let me go ahead and and just do that. So I would keep this level in memory. Take all the other

ones, spill those out to disk. And then I just take now while this is already in memory, build the hash table for this. Maybe not even do the the bucketing right phase. I switch it directly to the hash table. and then now populate it as I'm scanning along and then this guy can then do the join directly against it. Right? I think it's called hybrid because again instead of doing the hash table part at the top level here, you could just do the nested loop nested loop join because it's already in

memory. So you're kind of doing both algorithms together. This is challenge to get right because like again, how do you know whether something's going to be the hot partition or not? All right. uh are you is it are you just better off using the extra memory to keep these things uh keep more of these pages in memory rather than building this hash table thing. So Postgress does this. A bunch of different commercial systems do this. The language is confusing because sometimes they'll call this the hybrid

join. So the hybrid hash join. Um so finding out who actually does this is is not not always clear. And like I said, sometimes just better using the buff pages for uh for the for the partitions you're building rather than, you know, specializing one of them to be the hot one. All right. So finish up. So the for our hash joints the probe table can be sort of really any size but in general we want we want it to fit in memory because again we don't want have to do a bunch of random IO on disk that's going to be

the death to us right if everything fits in memory then the the probe can be really fast you just sort of scan it through once and don't do any partitioning. Uh if you don't know what the size of the table could be, then you maybe want to use the extendable hashing or the linear hash table that we talked about uh a couple classes ago. Most systems don't do that because again those data structures are are less efficient [clears throat] because there's more machinery to them than like a linear pro hash table. So

when we talk about query optimization, as I said a couple times already that like they're going to try to estimate how much data or how many tupils you're going to have to put into your hash table so that you can sort of size it correctly and not have to, you know, spill or resize it uh later on. But getting that correct is be super hard to do. Uh it's hard enough to do it for for base tables themselves like I'm reading the tables, but then try to do estimates of the size of data after I do multiple

joins. Everyone gets that wrong. and horribly wrong. So, you know, it's the only way to sort of to handle it is should be very uh uh you overallocate the memory for your hash table to avoid that problem. Of course, that makes you less efficient because now you're using memory that you're allocating memory you may actually need for your for your hash join. Could be used for other things, but again, it's it's you're just trying to avoid having to spill to disk. All right. So, here's a summary slide of

the of the different algorithms we talked about. Again, in general, the hash join is going to be preferable, right? If you don't already have an index and you don't think the the data you're trying to join it will fit in disk. >> Yes. >> Yes. Yes. >> So the question is um I I mentioned a different diff I mentioned a different a bunch of different scenarios where one Jordan argument will be better than another. And so the first question is, do database systems implement different

join algorithms? Yes. Do data systems then try to figure out which of these joint algorithms they should use at runtime when your query shows up? Yes. So that'll be query optimization. That'll be after the the fall break. Roughly the formulas they're going to use to try to figure this out looks like this. Right now >> what are the ones that are there? So the question is of this menu here uh which ones are going to have the good ones have all of them. Postgress has all these, right? Oracle has all of these.

DB2, duct DB, they have you have to have all of them. My SQL didn't have a hash joins until like I 30 25 years later. Like they didn't add it until 2019. And I don't think they have s they don't have server merge joins still, right? But that's okay because they were focusing on like not analytical workloads. It's it's an OOLTP system, right? So I was just trying to say like the the the if you're building a data system from scratch when you have to implement your join the first thing you're going to

implement is basically block nested loop join because it's the easiest thing to do and then after that you're probably going to want to implement the hash join because it's going to be way more efficient and there's a bunch of different operations and tweaks you can do for all these like there's there's a bunch of variations of these things you can have different hash tables you know based on the data you're you're going to join together like click house has 20 hash implementations like there's within

these general categories algorithms there's a bunch of different optimizations you can do and that's what that's going to be what distinguishes the enterprise expensive systems from the uh from like you know the the the open source ones now with that said ductb and postgress have a lot of these things that they're pretty good ductb is probably pretty state-of-the-art right um but the the challenge is always going to be in the query optimizer to figure out which of these one of these ones you

should use and in in practice again I said the estimations are always be really bad so the hash join is usually the fallback >> yes >> the question is what's the C index loop joint that's the constant cost of probing the index undefined because it depends on what the index is and what the data looks like right it also depends on like what the the join is if echo join you know in the case of a B+ tree it's low again to go to the bottom but if it's like they were asking well actually and if the the key

is not unique in that index I may traverse the bottom and then scan along leaf nodes how many do you have to scan it depends on what the data is what the query is so that we just say see but when we talk about optimization it'll know at that point you'll know what the query is you know what you want to do you know what the data roughly looks like you know data structure you're hitting up so that query optimization time we take a SQL query and convert it to the actual plan you execute that's when you fill in C

all right again so the main take away from from right here it should be hashing is almost always be preferable to sorting unless the data needs to be sorted as part of the output then you you can just piggy back off that even then some cases sorting that you know doing the hash join then sorting it still might be even better uh again depends on the hardware depends on the query depends on the data So and you know related to his question the good systems good in quotes uh will will have pretty much all of these techniques and

a bunch of other optimizations but these are the these are the general three algorithms you can do. You can either have nest of for loops hash things or sort things. There isn't there isn't anything else. Okay. All right. What's next class? Yeah. Midterm. Okay. So again, make sure you have your notes, your CMU ID. Don't do any weird things like one year, one kid brought his wet laundry. Don't do that, right? Uh I won't be here, but my PhD students will be uh will be managing

for us. Okay. All right, man. Hit it. [music] clips across [music] [music] [music] [music] flow with the drain. Get the fortune maintain flow with Great. [music]

