[music] [music] I'm still ass. [music] [music] >> All right, let's get started. Round of applause for DD Cash. [applause] Welcome back everyone. I you did a bunch of travels over the break. >> Yes, sir. Yes, sir. >> Went to LA. >> San Francisco. >> See like Do you do any shows out there or you just hanging out? >> Oh, yeah. DJing a little bit. >> Yeah. >> Here and there. >> Okay. Is that Did you live stream it? >> My friend wanted to, but we didn't.

>> Okay, that's fair. All right. So, hopefully everyone had a good break. I did what I because I only care about databases. I visited a bunch of database companies. We went to Snowflake. We went to Superbase. We went to Planet Scale. We went to Microsoft. Like, we talked about databases. It was awesome. Um, and when we talk about uh query optimization next week, I can share what I think is the from Microsoft of the [clears throat] one of the most brilliant ideas I've heard the entire year of how they're

going to prove two query two SQL queries are the same and they're going to use the query optimizer for that. So next week we'll see how it's not you know you kind of need to understand what the quer manizer is first but when they told me what they were doing I was like oh that's pure genius because it's taking a SQL query rewriting it with an LLM and then you need to prove that it's the same and use the query manizer for it. Sorry I'm getting way ahead of myself because I think the idea is awesome but

we'll we can talk about briefly next week. Today we got to talk about how how we're gonna actually execute queries. All right. So for everyone project two is coming up this Sunday due again the recitation video is available on box on on uh piaza I think AWS is down this morning so everything was broken uh so you couldn't probably get to to uh to great scope and to AWS but uh it should be up now. I haven't checked but it was broken this morning. And then we're having a special office hours this

Saturday uh on the 25th at 3 o'clock. Same location on the fifth floor. And then for the midterm grades, they've been posted on uh on grade scope on Canvas. And then if you want to view your uh view your grade of the exam with the solution, uh come to my office hours on Wednesdays and you can sit down with it and and look at it. Okay. Who here has not started project two? Really? Okay. Wow. All right. Uh it's not gonna be good. That's not good. Uh I warned you. All right. Project two is

much harder than project one. So please start immediately after class. Okay. All right. So uh other debates things going on. So today after class we have the guys from columnar uh who are building this is a thing called Apache arrow. Think of like it's a a file format similar like parquet or vortex but it's inmemory. So this is a way to transfer data quickly between different systems. So arrow is used everywhere. And then they have this arrow database compatibility or database connectivity

API. It's a layer that sits in front of your application and the database server. So you can send data back and forth between your application and the database server much more quickly. Uh this is used in pretty much every single modern system. So that'll be our talk today at 4:30. Tomorrow uh I'll post this on Piaza when it comes back online. We have the guys from Astronomer coming giving a tech talk on the eighth floor at at noon. So there'll be pizza here for this one. Astronomer is the main

company building Airflow. This is like an orchestration layer for sending data from one system to the other and I know we posted for uh internships and jobs from those guys on Piaza. So they're coming on campus tomorrow to give a talk about that and then I'll follow up with people if you want to meet with them uh to have like a small group session about discuss internships and jobs. Uh we'll arrange that in the afternoon uh before they fly out. And then next week uh same time will be on Monday the seminar

series will be the guy from single store to expand upon what he talked about in this class. Okay. Again all this is optional and I'll post about the astronomer stuff on uh PASA later today. All right. So last class before the break we were discussing different join algorithms join operator implementations you nested loop joins sort merge joins and hash joins. Right. Right? So now at this point we've covered sort of the basic building blocks you need to to be able to run queries. We know how to sort

data right whether it's in memory or out of memory. Uh we know how to do aggregations. We know how to do joins. And so starting today for the next two weeks now we put all these pieces together in a conceptual system we'll describe as we go along. But now we can actually start executing queries. So we can take the buffer pool that we built. We can take the the page layouts we we've designed. We can take now these operator implementations. We're going to mash them all together into a single

system and actually start executing queries. So that's what really today's about and next class will be about. Next week we'll jump on the query optimizer and that'll be how to take a SQL query and convert it into a physical plan that we're going to talk about how to execute today. Okay. So again as a reminder the query plan in a relational data system is going to be a DAG of operators, right? Ideally it's a DAG. Most systems implement a tree but a tree is a subset of a DAG. The idea

still holds. And and again, the idea is that we're going to be moving data up logically, and I'll explain what I mean by logically versus physically in a second. We're moving data logically between these different operators till we get the root of the query plan. And that's the final output that we send back to whoever requested the query, whether it's an internal query, we keep the data for ourselves or an application or somebody sitting sitting at a terminal, right? The the root is always

going to be the final app that we send out to the the the to outside the system. But now we need to slice up this this this query plan a little bit further and talk about pipelines. And pipelines are just again these logical boundaries we're going to use to denote that we have a sequence of operators where tupils can flow continuously between the operators, right? Going from the the bottom to the top and we can we we can keep going up across these operators and we don't have to stop or wait for more results.

Right? And a pipeline breaker would be the operator that's going to be at the the the root or the top of one of these pipelines that can't finish or can't give any output to whatever is above it until it gets all the input of its children. So in my case here, say assume we're doing a hash join. Although in this plan again it's just the join symbol. We're not saying what what the actual algorithm is. We're saying we're doing hash join. Uh we're going to scan R and

build a hash on that. Well, that's the pipeline we really only can have. We have we have the the scanning R populate some hash the hash table and then we can't execute anything else until this pipeline finishes because we can't do the join and start probing the hash table until we know that the hash table isn't populated because we could get false negatives. So you'll see this also in in sorting, right? I can't have my sort operator produce any output until I sort my data,

right? Because I can't tell you what the order is going to be until I sorted everything. So these pipeline breakers are going to be a way we're going to denote the boundaries of where we can do as much work as we can on single tupils or batches of tupils and we don't have to get more data until we reach one of these pipeline breakers at the top. The reason why it's called pipeline because it's the old days in the 70s was the idea was like I can it's so expensive to go get a tupil from disk.

So I can one of these bottom scan operators on my tables. I I'll go get one tupil and I'll ride it up as far as I can up into my pipeline and don't go back and get the next tupil uh until I reach my pipeline breaker, right? I would do as much work as I can with data I bring into memory uh as I can and not have to like write things out to disk unnecessarily. So that's the again the high level model what we're dealing with today. uh and the reason why I was trying to be uh careful saying what logically versus

physically moving data because going back here right it's clear from this diagram looks like data is being sort of pushed up but most systems don't do that actually data is actually pulled up physically so that'll be the processing models we'll cover that first then we'll talk about access methods like what are the actual leaves of the query plan how are we actually getting data from our tables because that's something we haven't really talked about in in detail then we'll talk about how we hand handle

modifications queries. So, insert, update, deletes, merge, and upserts. And then we'll finish off talking about how we're actually going to evaluate the expressions we have in our wear clauses or join clauses or whatever it is to actually produce the the matches or do filtering, whatever a query wants. Okay, you good? Okay. Um, all right. So the query processing model is going to is going to determine how the system is going to execute a query plan and move data between these different operators in the plan. Moving

data sort of one from one operator to the next. And just like we saw when we talked about storage models between like row store versus column store, there's going to be performance trade-offs or uh and also engineering trade-offs between these different processing model approaches, right? One's going to be better for OLTP and one's going to be better for for OLAP. And so each processing model is going to be comprised of these two types of uh communications or execution paths in our query plan. One is going to be the

control flow and that's how the database system is going to say or to instruct an operator to execute, right? And how the how we're encapsulating what the operator code actually is, whether it's a class or a function or whatever, it doesn't matter. But there's something that's saying in the data system say, "Hey, go run this operator. Do do your work." And then the data flow is going to determine how an operator is going to send data from one operator to the next in in our query

plan. Right? Logically, I'm showing the directed arrows going up from the bottom to the top. And it doesn't necessarily have to be that way, right? And then the thing that we also need to worry about is what is the what is the output of these operators? And I we're sort of loosely slaying tupils, but we talked about the difference between early materialization and late materialization for before, right? We said sometimes where in late materialization maybe you just pass along the bare minimum columns you need

and then a record ID so that if some part of the query plan needs more data, it knows how to go get it. In early materialization, you basically instantiate the entire tupil. May throw things away with projections, but that's fine. But basically, you never go back to the the tables and get more data. Everything you need is being moved up to the query plan. All right. So the three basic approaches are do the iterative model, materialization model and the vectorzed or the batch model. The original for the

last one the original uh papers referred to as the vectorzed model. Of course now if you Google vector databases or vectorzed databases you're going to get all the the rag vector index stuff or evendity stuff. But you know we just think of this in batches. And the way to think of this on the the the as as we see as we go along, the the iterator model is going to be sending sort of the smallest amount of data from one upper to the next. Materialization model is going to be sending all the data from one upper to the next. And

then the batch model is going to be sending a subset. And in terms of of how common these are in the real world, most data systems you know about and can think about are going to be using the first approach, right? Postgress, my SQL, SQL light, the the OLAP systems like the ductbds, the red shifts, the firebolts, the click houses, those guys are going to be using the bottom one. The middle one is actually very rare. There's there's maybe five or six systems that actually use it. Two of them I wrote. So there's not that many.

But we'll go along each of these one by one and we'll see um we'll see the advantages and disadvantages of all three models as we go along. All right. So the most basic model or the the simplest model the most common model is the iterative model. This is sometimes called the volcano model because remember that guy that uh invented or wrote that the the the the book on like B+ trees he had a very famous project in the late 80s early 90s called volcano that defined not only how you do this

iterative model but also how you parallelize it we'll see that next class and also how you build a query optimizer uh all in sort of one one project is very influential that was also called volcano we'll see that next week as well um but that you know it's not to say that thing didn't exist before uh this guy wrote the paper in the late 80s. Again, all the systems in the 70s and 80s were doing this which is now you know you could call the volcano model and someone who's familiar with the the

the research area would know what you're talking about but in the textbook I think defines this as the iterator model. So in our database system every query plan operator it's going to implement a next function and the the contract the next function has is that when one operator calls next on another operator's you know next function invokes the next function that operator that operator's next function either returns back the next tupil up the the query plan or like a null or end of file

to indicate there are no more tupils and at which point the calling operator will never call next again because you know there's no more data that could could arrive or could be used below you at at that point in the query plan. Right? There's obviously also an open and close functions to like think of like a constructor deconstructor in C++ basically saying hey I'm going to tell hey I'm going to go read some data get ready and maybe you instantiate an iterator on an index or open a file

handle whatever and then close basically saying like close up whatever free up whatever inter you know uh ephemeral memory you've allocated for this right again this is also called the pipeline model because it it it's again the simplest form of this moving things up in a pipeline so I normally don't like to show code in class, but for this it's pretty simple. Um, and I so I don't think this should be too taxing for you guys. Um, but here's our here's our query plan, right? And you can think of

each of these operators are going to have their own operator implementation that is going to have this sort of pseudo Python code here, right? And so think of each of these functions as or these blocks of code as implementing the next function for the different operators, right? And to sort of keep this simple, we're going to number them from one starting at the top and going to the bottom. So the way you start executing query in the iterator model is you start the database systems sort of runtime engine, the

thing that's actually scheduling queries to to execute will invoke next on the root, right? And the next function is is or the next implementation for that top operator which is the the projection. It knows that it has some number of children that it can call next on to go get data that it needs. So the the top next function calls next on the next guy and this is the our hash join here. And so we have the left side and the right side. So on the left side we got to build the hash table. So it's going to

call next on its left child. And that gets down now to the scan operator on table R. And now you see inside this we we're just have this for loop iterating every single tupole in R. Now obviously hiding like how do we get it from the buffer pool? How do we find the pages? All that we know how to do that from earlier lectures. But inside that for loop we just have this emit function and that's basically like returning the next tupil that uh up to whoever called next on this operator. If you ever written like a a Python

generator, there's like a yield function. So I'm not showing how we're we're freezing state inside of our for loop. Think of the same sort of way you would do this in Python. Right? And obviously C++ it's a little more um it's you know it's a more complicated the more machinery you got to do. Right. So this out in in in operator 2 it's calling next next over the left child and down below we're just feeding up tupils from table R and then inside the for loop for the left child

and in in operator two I'm building my hash table. And at some point the the the operator 3 says I don't have any more tupils for you. And at which point operator two knows I never need to call three again. So now let me go on down my right right side of my branch my my tree and call next on my child my right child that has a it own that calls next on its child. Now this is just scanning tupil someum s and emitting them up to do the probe inside the hash table. Right. And it then if I have a match in

my in my when I'm doing my join then I emit that up into my protection operator which then can then emit that up to whoever called or invoked the the query. So for for the pipeline for this is that we have one on the right side here pipeline one because I can call I call next on my left child in operator two and I keep ripping through tupils in R until I don't get anymore and at which point I can then switch over and start executing uh pipeline two and then if you kind of think about is for for one

tupil that I would I pull out of S at five I pass it up to four check to see where the the predicate values are true if yes I pass it up to do that it checks to see whether uh if I probe the hash table I have a match if it does then I pass it up to one it does projection and then it produces it final output so I've sort of pipelineed the entire uh all the processing for the for the tupil on this side of the tree so the great thing about this model is that it's it's it's a pretty simple you

know uh interface it's just open next close so I'm not even defining how we're actually doing the scan here in at these leaf nodes. In some systems, I may actually want to scan the entire table, materialize it in an in-memory buffer and just keep track of a cursor every time you call next, what's the next tuple I want to hand out. Or you could do it be, you know, sort of eagerly uh anytime you call next, go get the the next tup on the page and then if it's that pages, if I if I already scan that

page, go get the next page. So I could do everything all at once and just materialize the output and wait to pass it up one by one. Or I could do it one at a time. It doesn't matter. And the rest of the implementation of the other operators doesn't have to care. Yeah. So, so his statement is and he's correct like let's not talk about parallel execution, right? Just the notion is that I can't do I can't go down the if here I can't go down the right side of the tree until I finish scanning the

the left side. Now, there is a technique called symmetric hash joins where you actually kind of do both, but we we don't need nobody does that. >> What's that again? one sort join. >> Yeah, if you did a merge sort join, like you'd have to scan and sort everything. Well, yeah. So, his point is if I was doing a sort merge join, I could scan and sort both of these guys in parallel. Then once they're both done, then combine them. That's next class. Let's keep it simple. Keep it single threaded,

but your intuition is correct. All right. So, hopefully this this shouldn't be like mindbending for everyone. It's again, it's pretty basic. You know, this is what Busub is using. So, you'll see this in project 3, right? It's easy to implement. It's easy to debug because I just hook up GDB or pick your favorite debugger and just walk through all the next functions and see how things move around, right? Uh, and like I said, it's easy to run as a single threaded model. Next class, we'll

see how to paralyze it, right? And the advantage is that I can pipeline a bunch of data all the way through my operators without having to go get the next tupil. So, I want to go as far as I can up until until I'm until I'm done, right? And some systems go take this to like the next level. And I'm just talking about keeping things in like, you know, our our memory. And other systems with this pipeline model, they'll try to keep things in CPU caches or like the Germans try to keep things in CPU registers

because that's the fastest memory you can have all the way up. And that's really fast. But for that, we we don't we don't need to worry about that. All right. So the iterative model it's been great for OTP because it's going to get one tuple at a time because most your queries only need a small number of tupils. So the overheadness is is actually pretty small, right? And another nice thing about this model too is that for like limit when you have like limit functions uh or sorry limit

operators like going back here like if I only need the first 10 tupils that come out of this, it's really easy for me to implement that because I just put the limit above above one or sorry above two and I just stop calling next when I have enough tupils for my output. Right? So it's so the I'm sort of blending the control and the data flow all sort of in one channel, but it does make certain things easier than it would be for other things. Of course, there's a bunch of downsides

like the function calls and next can be expensive, especially if you're trying to rip through a billion tupils. Like a function call doesn't seem like that much, but like in modern CPUs, that's expensive and you have to do this for a billion tupils, that's going to start to add up. All right. So, another approach is called the materialization model. And it's basically the same thing, but it's it's it's the iterator model, but instead of passing up one tupil, I'm

going to pass up all the tupils from an operator. And at which point, I'm basically calling next once, and I never go back and ask for more data because I know I've gotten everything I could ever want. Right? Of course, the problem's going to be with this is like if I only need a subset of the data, uh like if I have a limit clause, then I don't want to have to pass up a billion two between different operators just to get to the limit at the top says, "Oh, I only need 10 out of these a billion,

right?" And so the we'll see this in a second. You basically do operator fusion where you can kind of start merging down logic that would normally be up above in the query plan. you start putting it as low as possible or embedding inside of operators so that I'm not doing a bunch of redundant work or passing around data that I end up throwing away or don't need. And then just like before with um with uh you know with the iterator model right when I'm the data I'm passing

could either be the entire tupil could be late materialization with a record ID and some some columns or a subset of the columns right there's tricks you want you want to do it's like try to reduce how much data you're sending up and that matters a lot in the materialization model because again I'm sending all the data up [snorts] so this technique was developed in the 1990s it was a system called monadb uh that came out of CWI I uh CWI is basically where where ductb comes from or the the co-founder Snowflake did his

PhD there and he invented basically they they looked at this saw this was terrible in MODB and then the guy uh built a better system that then he went off co-ounder of Snowflake that fixed this ductb fixes this too but we'll see this in a second. All right. So now in our operator implementations we have uh which again we still have these for loops. We're calling you know get next or calling output on our on our children. Um but now in these these operative implementations I don't call

I don't call like a yield or emit to send things in peace meal. I just have this output function that I'm returning or out buffer and return back all the tupils to whoever asked me for it. So at the very top of the projection we call we call down into this join. join then calls down to its leaf node. Again, I'm just going to scan through R. Just add all the tupils in my output buffer. Return that up to my uh to the the the join operator. It then builds the hash table. Then it calls on the right side

down its children, goes down the tree, and then sends back up the tupils in in in their entirety, computes the join, and produces the final output. >> [snorts] >> So again, if you think about always thinking in extremes, if table S has a billion tuples and you look at the side of the pipeline, what am I doing? I'm scanning S, putting every single tuple in a buffer, then passing that to the filter operator, who then it's going to look to see what which one of those, you know, tupils I want to throw away. So

again, if you have a billion tupils, but I only need I only get you like 10 of them. I don't I don't want have to pass a billion tupils up just to find out I need 10. So with operator fusion, the basic idea is that you combine together the operators in the query plan so that as I'm scanning the table, I can then apply my filter and throw things away. This is basically how you know you can do the same thing in iterator model or the vectorzed model, but it it's a big deal in the materialization model just

because you're passing along so much data. Seems crazy, but why would you ever want to do this? Let me take a guess. What's that? >> He said they're stupid. No, the guy invented this is probably he's dead but one of the d best datab researchers of all time. So no, he's not stupid. >> Always >> if you always need a lot or uh if it's o you know the guy that invented this who was an OLAP system uh they were assumed that you would need all the all the data within a column but

not all the columns. So they would do projections as operator fusion and throw away a bunch of these columns and just the columns you don't need and only pass up the columns you do need. >> Right? And then now you don't pay the overhead of calling get next get next get next for just to get all the columns from one operator to the next. the operators together. >> Save it as uh if you do operator fusion, you fuse everything together, which you can't. You kind of you can fuse things

in pipelines, but not always. >> Then it kind of just one giant program. Uh again, if you have a if you have a pipeline some like I can't fuse together. Some things I can fuse together, some some things I can't. And the Germans are very good at fusing like almost all together. You can fuse everything within a pipeline. But soon as I have to go across pipelines, I can't do that. So for OLAP, no one does this except for again very few systems. This actually works in OTP systems because most of the

time you're not getting a lot of data. So the overhead of having to call get next, get next, get next, uh, if you can fuse everything together because you're probably going to only have one pipeline, then it collapses down and becomes way more efficient. Again, this is for inmemory systems, it matters a lot, right? Like because I I'm not worried about fetching things from disk. I'm trying to reduce my number of function calls I have to make for OLTP. This makes this makes a huge difference.

Um, but and most systems most OLAP systems don't do this. like high-rise was an experimental system out of Germany that started implementing with this approach and then they in the in the rewrite they got rid of it and switched over to uh the vectorzed model we'll see in the next the next uh next slide then Raven DB is a document database system think like MongoDB but out of Israel and again they're doing OTP so it's uh it makes sense in that environment right it's simple model easy

to code easy to debug uh and it's not bad until you start getting with really large data set sizes or intermediate results then it falls apart. [snorts] All right. So the the best approach for OLAP is going to be the vectorzed model or vectorization model and that's going to be somewhere in between the iterator model and the materialization model. So instead of passing along a single tupil or all the tupils I pass along a subset or a batch of them and different systems have different batch sizes. I think duct

DB is like 1024, right? It's not going to be in the millions. is going to be some some multiple of a power two like 1024 or 2048 something like that. >> [snorts] >> So you're still going to have a next function but again now set instead of passing along single tuple you're going to pass along a batch or a vector right and then within the we're not going to go in too much detail for this in this uh for this course but there's a bunch of logic or there's different ways to

handle the case where I know my batch sizes are 2048 but if I start filtering things out in in a batch as I go up do I wait to get more data down below to fill that batch up back to 2048 or 1024 or do I just pass along whatever I have up up the query plan and let it be sparse as you go up. There's not there's pros and cons each of those approaches but for this class we don't need to worry about it. It's more about like how do we keep keep track of this or how do we actually just sort of implement the basic idea of

this. [snorts] All right. So again going back to our approach here or sorry our our example here right now in our operator functions or our next implementations now we see that instead of passing along uh you know instead of calling a mit immediately when we have a tupil as our output we are maintaining an output buffer but it's not the full you know it's not going to be some large chunk of memory that we would have in the material materialization model. Now that we check to see anytime that our buffer

is our output buffer is full then we emit it up. Right? Right. So now again down here I'm going to scan through table R add a tupil to my output buffer and then only if the the size of the output buffer is is greater than n where it ends my batch size or target batch size then I pass up the tupal batch and I do the same thing down below over here right straightforward. So this idea seems obvious. It's only existed since like I don't know 2006 2007, right? Even in the in the OLAP systems that were around uh in the in

the 90s or 1980s, they were still doing the iterative model or in the case of MODB, they were doing the materialization model. And like I said, the guy that was a co-founder of Snowflake was at CWI, saw them, saw MDB doing materialization model, thought of a better way to doing it in this batch approach and then he did a startup that got bought by Ingress, which was one of the first legend databases, but then they killed off that project and then he went and founded Snowflake with two guys from Oracle. The Snowflake is the

behemoth uh that it is today. But pretty much every new database system that does OLAP targeting OLAP workloads in the last 10 years is going to be doing this approach. And again, the size of the batch will vary. Uh 1024 is probably just anecdotally I would say is probably the most common one. There's a bunch of other optimizations that you can do now because you're dealing with batches uh that we're not going to talk about. uh but if you know what SIMD is or uh single instruction multiple data items

like now that I'm operating on a column of data that's all the same that that it's going to be aligned together in memory I can shove that in my SIMD registers and do a bunch of processing in parallel and it's really really fast or I can shove things down to a GPU if I wanted to and do processing on parallel on on those batches as well right [snorts] so the the data system is is going to have a really efficient implementations for now these operator kernels because they're just ripping

through these arrays or these these vectors very efficiently and you're you're basically doing the same amount of work for a bunch of tupils altogether. Uh, and that's the best thing for a modern CPU because I don't have a bunch of branches or conditionals like I'm taking a batch of data and having a tight for loop to do whatever processing I want on it and then pass it up. Right? [snorts] Again, there's there's probably there's way more systems than I'm showing here,

but every system that does OLAP nowadays is going to use this approach. And even systems that start started off the iterator model abandon it and switch over to the uh vectorzed model. All right. So we have this iterandator model, the materialization model and the the the vectorzation model. In all the examples I I showed showed now we assume that there's this next function that I kick off the query processing for for given query plan by starting at the root calling next and then that sort of

percolates uh its way down the tree and data starts moving uh from from moving towards the top. Right? So I'm essentially pulling data from the top of the query plan by calling next. I'm sort of pulling it up uh between the operators up into the query plan to to I reach the top right now. This is how most data systems are going to implement this. So this is like this is sort of independent of whether I'm doing vectorization or iterator model in either all three of those different processing models. I can have this next

fun next function extraction and do that pulling of the data up. We would call this the so lucid call this the plan processing direction. And so the first approach is this what I just said what I've been showing you so far is again calling next pulling data up but there's a whole another approach where you actually start with the bottom and push data up and this is why I was trying to be careful saying like oh when I show the query plan at the beginning of the lecture I'm saying oh this is logically

how data is going to flow but the implementation the physical implementation could actually be different. So in the pushbased model it is kind of like again thinking at thinking how the diagram is drawn in the logical plan like I'm going to start at the leaf nodes and they're going to do whatever processing I have on them and then move data up. So I don't even start at the root and call next down low. There is really no next function. There's some higher level scheduler that says here's

all the the operators I need to execute or here are the pipelines I need need to execute and then it knows how to invoke them individually which may not be sort of that top the same uh bottom to the top order. it can decide on its own how to reorder the the pipelines to execute uh based on um you know based on what what it thinks is the most efficient plan of efficient strategy. So let me show you what I mean by this. So we have these two pipelines here and again each of them will have their own

operator implementations right the first pipeline here we're just going to be scanning table R and then we're we'll build some hash table and then for our second pipeline we're going to take all the tupils in S and probe whatever hash table got built down below us and uh and then emit them if if there's an match after doing the projection. So I'm doing operator fusion here within my pipeline because it's just take one tupil and run it through those those individual operators until I produce my output.

Right? But there's no direct connection. There's no emit function anymore or next invocation between these different pipelines. I just know I have these two pieces of code. They're going to get data from somewhere. They're going to write data somewhere. And then now I have a highle scheduler that they can say well here's all the tasks I need to execute within my for for this query. It can then decide in the order in which it wants to execute it. But it knows the dependencies of the data that between

these different pipelines. So no, it can't run pipeline two until pipeline one finishes populating the hash table. So it it invoke pipeline one first and then now there'll be part of this task that we're executing here. There'll be some notion of there's a location of where I can write my data to, right, as as I produce my results. So as I build my hash table, I could just be allocating pages in in my buffer pool and writing my hash table out to there. Uh and then when I get full and get more

pages and then when my operator one is finished, the schedule says, "Oh, well, one is finished, but I know task two was waiting for task one to produce results. So I can now schedule to execute task two. And oh, by the way, task two, here's the location of the data that the first task wrote wrote to. So if you need to go get it its output, here's where to go find it, right? And then it can do the same thing. It's going to do some output that it has when it does the the join and the

projection, and write to that output buffer. When the task finishes, the schedule knows here's the final location of of the data that this second operator produced or second task produced and it knows that's the result that one sends back to whoever asked for the query to execute. So I'm now I'm separating the the notion of like the the control flow and the data flow meaning like the scheduleuler is saying execute this task execute that task and it's not trying to piggy back

off like that next function to say all right this guy calls this guy calls call calls this guy because that's basically the same scheduling mechanism but it's implicitly happening because of the way the the the next thing sort of propagates down but now I have these discrete tasks and I can have a more global view what's going on in my query and I can make better decisions how I want to schedule things. Again, the push model because I would schedule the leaf nodes first and they're sort of pushing data up rather

than me starting at the top and and working my way down and pulling data to to the top. So, there's pros and cons to all of these. Again, it's way easier to implement the top to the bottom the pool based approach and most systems are going to do this, right? It's easy, we talked before, it's easy to control the output for my limit clauses because I know how to you basically stop calling next when I know I have enough data, right? Uh in the case of the bottom to the top of the pushbased model, you can

you can have a better implementation of these operators that can be more careful about where they're putting data. I'm showing to write to generic output buffers, but you can start doing things like within my fuse pipelines, put things in registers and then make sure that the next task is scheduled can then read maybe read those registers or something, right? For some operators, it can be diplom like a sort merge join because I have to sort of I have to sort two things separately and then run a test that then

does does the join. Whereas I could have a sing you if I'm doing the the poolbased model I could have a single pipeline assume that the first result is sorted then sort the second one and then just feed things up through uh through that way. Um but that that's a low level detail you don't need to worry about. So the top one is way more common. The second one I would say is rarish. Uh the the most famous system that probably start started implementing this approach was hyper from the Germans. And then

this found its way into Umbrella. There's the second version of hyper but you know a ducky be started off actually using the top one and then they realized that was a mistake or they realized that it was a better idea to do the second one do the bottom one here so they switched to that but they originally didn't start this way click house does this cb is a is a commercial fork of umbra firebolt does this snowflake does this like the major OLAP systems all do this approach in combination with the

vectorization model but again those two design choices are are independent so I could do vectorization model with the the pullbased approach data fusion does this uh a bunch of other systems do this but the the the second one is is has a bunch of advantages but you maybe don't only realize until you actually implement the first one. Yes. model. >> This question is in in a in a could a database system support different processing models. So not the plan direction but the processing model. So

iteration materialization vectorization. Yes. In theory yes. Nobody does that because it's it's now you got to implement everything a bunch of different things, right? And it makes it harder now to com potentially compose things together. I mean, you basically can get the you can get the iterator model if you implement vectorzation or actually really all of these by just having your vector size be one. It's the same thing. It's be it could be less efficient because you're put things in

an output buffer, right? Versus just passing along a single tupil, but it's basically the same. But nobody would do that because now you're maintaining you know you know different variations of the same thing and that becomes an engineering nightmare. It's just not worth it. Yeah. So his question is so say go back to um let's do iterative model and and then the virtualization model. So in this slide here I'm showing Oracle I'm showing SQL server right. Let's focus on

those two and then and and or DB2 as well. But then when I jump over now to uh the vectorization model uh Oracle's here DB2's there SQL server's there. So in the case of Oracle, uh we didn't get to talk about this, but they actually have run dual engines. So they'll have a column store engine and a row store engine all within the same binary, but they're separate code bases. So technically they support both. Same with like SQL server. They would have they have like a column store

engine. So basically Oracle, SQL Server, DB2, all these systems are from like the 1980s or or 1970s. And so they're all row based uh pool row based pool iterator model implicitations and then when column stores and OLAP stuff became more common they realize oh our implicitation is not is not efficient right vectorization model is better the let's ignore the pushbased thing vectorization model is better and passing being a column store is better so they have separate engines that can that can you know use these different

approaches but within one like within one engine itself it won't patch that that would just be a nightmare to maintain. Okay, cool. All right. Um [snorts] All right. So now we want to talk about access methods. So now we know conceptually how we're going to move data up from the different operators or move between different operators. Okay. I I don't mean to use direction but like I think you understand the between the different approaches now, right? So the access method is going to be how you get

data from the leaf nodes, right? Because in relational algebra, there wasn't a definition. There wasn't we didn't say, oh, here's a stretch scan operator or here's an index operator. It was just like I do a filter or projection or a select on a on a on a relation, but I didn't define how I'm actually going to get the data. So now we in our implementation, we actually have we have to worry about that, right? So there's three basic approaches. you either do a sequential scan. That's the fallback

approach. Like no matter what, I can always crunch scan the data. Uh but if I have an index, uh then there's a bunch of different ways I could go at this. And I can either choose one index and do an index scan or in some systems I have multiple indexes. I can do index scans on all of them or some some portion of them and then be clever about how I combine the results to put it together. Right? So we're really focusing right now like how do we actually do this this bottom part here. [snorts] And like I

said, the squuncher scan is the easiest thing to implement. Assume you're doing a heap based system. It's just going to the page directory, getting whatever the first page is, reading, you know, scanning it, finding tupils, and then emitting them or putting them in a buffer or however, however it's actually being implemented, doesn't matter. Just I'm going page by page and reading data out and shoving it up to the next operator. And basically the the data system or the operator implementation will maintain

its own cursor that just keeps track of where it left off in what the last page or the last table that I looked at so that if it calls next again or has to require more more results it knows where to pick it up where it left off before right alternatively you could just you know materialize everything scan all the pages put it in a buffer and then c you know scan through that or iterate through that and shove tupils up but you know that actually has that obviously has problems because if it's a large

table I got to put it somewhere in memory and I may you know it it may not be the most efficient way to do this right so again scan it's the fallback choice it seems like again if I have no index there's no other way to get data I can always just read the pages one by one so this seems like this would be terrible uh and very inefficient except that we've already talked about a bunch of different ways to make this go fast Right. Right. We've already covered a lot of these things in in previous lectures

like data encoding compression. What was that? That was taking data and converting it into a different binary form that exploits uh repeated values, repeated data. So that when I go fetch a page from from disk, I'm to do my scrunchial scan, I'm reading more tupils than I would otherwise if it was uncompressed. All right. We talked about how to do prefetching or scan shanning. We I think we skip bufferable bypass basically. just basically direct copy things into memory space for for for a worker. But

pre-fetching was a big deal was like if I know I'm going to scan the data uh sequentially, go fetch a bunch of pages ahead of time, bring them in memory so that when I need them, I don't stall waiting for disk, they're right there available for me. Task parallelization, multi-threading, we'll see that next class. Uh clustering, sorting. Again, if I'm doing I can do binary search over sorted data or I can do sort merge joins over sorted data much more efficiently than just if it was unsorted.

materialized views or sorry m lab materialization we already talked about like passing along bare minimum data I need materialized views and result caching we won't cover this semester result caching basically is like if I execute the same query over and over again and if the data hasn't changed why execute the query again just give you back the last result that is rare most systems don't do that materialized views is where the application tells it hey I'm going to execute the same query over

and over again and so premputee the results and give back give it back to uh you know the cache results when I run the same query or a query that looks or that could be answered by the the materialized view of course the challenge is how do you maintain the the freshness of that materialized result uh the high-end systems can incrementally update the materialized view like every single time if I if I'm computing the the sum of of a of a column every single time I insert a new tupil I don't have to scan all the

tupils and retreat the sum I can just increment or decrement based on what new value gets inserted or updated Right? Postgress can't do that. Postgress can't even do it automatically. You have to tell it when you want to refresh a materialized view. So, you know, we're not going to cover that this semester. And admittedly, to do the the sophisticated materialized views, that's the part of data systems I know the least about because it's it's really it's really tricky. Um, and very few

systems do this. [snorts] Data skipping is basically we'll cover in a second. Data paralization, vectorzation, we'll see in the next class. Co-pilation and compilation. I'll talk briefly about this end of the class here. Here I'll show what Postest does. It's basically saying, well, if I know I'm going to be executing this, I know I'm going to be executing this query. Rather than me interpret that and walk through that query query plan tree, let me just generate a program that does exactly

what the query wants to do. Compile that and that's going to be way faster than interpreting. So postcrist will do this for the wear clause. They won't do it for the whole things. The Germans do it for the whole things. Uh and we'll cover the end end of this class. All right. All right. So, I want to go through data skipping uh because again, this allows us to avoid reading data we don't actually need if we know we don't need it ahead of time. And then we'll cover these other ones in

a second. So, there's two ways to do data skipping. The first is is not that common. It's called approximate queries. Basically says, well, if I don't really need an exact answer, don't read all the data to compute the exact answer. If I want to get, you know, the number of visitors on my website for a given month, do I really need need to know the maybe I may not really need to know the exact count of those of those of the number of visitors, right? If I round it to the nearest thousand, if I you know, my

website's getting millions of views, that's good enough. So in the high-end systems there are in in addition to all the aggregate functions we talked about before like count min max sum average there's approximate count and approximate min approximate max they're basically doing sampling and the the better systems can give you sort of statistical guarantees about how accurate the the sample is and if I because if I really need the full answer I'll just do a complete scan [snorts]

zone maps is is way more common uh most systems do this most file formats support this basically it's a like a precomputed aggregation on a column so that depending on my query if I know that I don't need if I if I can look at the zone map and see that the data that the zone map represents can't be satisfied for my predicate I don't I don't bother reading it it's like a it's like a filter right it can't tell me whether data actually can't tell me where the data I may want is it can tell

me where a block of data would even have the data that I'm looking for and this is super common and it's in pretty much every system uses this. So say we have a simple column like this right a single single column with um with integer value. So my zone map could say like for this these set of values here's the min here's the max here's the average here's all the the the the aggregations I may want to compute on this right sometimes also use like the number of null values right ba basic

statistics min max and number null values are or the number number of distinct values most common ones but you can pretty much throw anything in there right and pretty much all the file formats parquet or the vortex one from last week that talk uh I think the guys giving talk this Wednesday as well. They all support basically the same kind of thing in their file formats. So now my query shows up select start from table where value is greater than 600. So say again I'm only showing five tupils here.

Say again if think in large terms I have a billion tupils. So I can look in this uh zone map and say well I want to I only want to look for values that are greater than uh 600. So, so I look in the zone map and the zone map says, well, my max value in this block of data is 400. So, I know there could never be a match for me in this in this block of data. So, I don't even go bother reading it. >> I read the zone at that smaller. Yes. >> Question is, how do you choose what approach you want to do in terms of

going back here? So, the first one is lossy, right? So, you're going to get wrong results. Is that okay? Well, the data system doesn't know doesn't know what you care about, right? It's your company, your organization, your startup, whatever. So maybe you know for for certain queries that's okay. The data system can't infer that because that's an externality it can't know about. So you have to say I want approximate that's approximate that right you always do this one. You always do

the bottom one because it's always a huge win, [snorts] right? Right? If it's your bank account, do you want to have approximate count on your your or sum on your your balance? No. Right? JSON can't know that. All right. So, there's a paper so the the oracle term is called zone maps. Sometimes you see these calls SMAS or small small materialized aggregates and it's a paper from 98 basically defines it in this way, right? Again, seems kind of obvious, but it didn't really come

out until the 1990s. And this guy here, Guido, he's a German. So this is the PhD adviser of like the number one German that does the umbra and hyper stuff that we talked about many times. So this is his PhD adviser. So the Germans are are ridiculous. [snorts] All right. So that's pretty much how what everything you do with special scan. We'll talk about compilation or code specialization at the end of class. So let's talk about index scans. Again, we know what index are being used for, right? We saw this

uh before how to figure out like you know what the how to use a B+ tree or skip list or whatever the dash we want to find the tupils that match whatever we want in to satisfy in our predicates in our query. Now the challenge is going to be how do we determine which index to use? Like if I have a bunch of indexes I can use on my my t that are available to me on my tables and my wear clause actually references a bunch of columns that are being managed or referenced by a bunch of indexes. Which one is going to be the

best one for me to use? That's a hard problem and that's what we'll cover next week. So for now we're going to ignore how do we pick what the best index to use is. So assume somebody some Oracle has not Oracle the system the company some Oracle has figured out this is the best one you use. So now we talk about how we actually want to go ahead and use it. [snorts] So the the way to think about this challenge is like we're trying to reduce the amount of work we have to do and it's going to

depend heavily on what the data looks like and what our predicate looks like. So say we have a query here. We want to get all the students that are less than 30 that are in the CS department and and come from the US. But I have an index on age and department. So one scenario, there's 99 people under the age of 30, but there's only two people in the CS department. But the flip side could be there's 99 people in the CS department, but only two of them are under the age of 30. Is that me? [ __ ] Sorry.

Sorry. My lawyer. All right. Uh, right. So, so in this case here, it's kind of obvious, right? So, if I have more students that are in in the the CS department, but only two people that are under the age of 30, then I want to use that age index because I can quickly go get those one two students that are age 30 and then it's go check to see whether they are, you know, in the CS1 or not. And the flip side, if I have more people that are under age of 30, I want to use the department one because that's more

selective. So, this is basically what the data center is going to try to figure out for us. And then once it is once we figure out this is the index I want to use based on the uh the API that's available to us that the index exposes then we just invoke that API in operator to get the data that we want right in a B+ tree or a skip list or a try. I can do range scans but I can't do that in a hash hash index. So this so the division also has to figure out all right my predicate has uh a an

inequality or a less than for some some my where my SQL query has a less than for age but it equals equals for department. So if I if I have a hash index on age I can't can't use that to satisfy this query. So it'll pick another index and then we just invoke the API to get the data we want out of it. The cool thing is that we may not we may not always have to make you know a single choice of like what's the one index I want to use out of all my indexes. Some systems let you use all

the index or as many indexes as you want and then you just do the probes or do the lookups on those indexes. You get back the record ids that match whatever your predicate is and then you just do either a union or intersection between the results of different indexes to find the the the tools that you want. So some systems will call these multi-index scans. Postgress calls this a bit map scan because it's going to build a bit map and then do do intersections on the bit maps. My SQL calls these an index merge. They're all

basically doing the same thing, right? And if the predicates in your wear clause across the different indexes, they're conjunctions or and clauses, then I just take the intersection of the the two sets. Or if I'm doing an or a disjunction, then I take the union of two sets. Then I have all the record ids that match what are the predicates across all my indexes and then I go go fetch them from the table to go go get actually results I need. So we going back here to our table again. So we have doing a look up of all

the students that are age less than 30 in department in computer science department in the US assuming I have an index on uh on age and department. So and they're both equally as good. So I'll retrieve all the I'll do a look up on the the age index to get all the tuples that are less than 30 or sorry the tuples where the age is less than 30. Then I'll do another probe in the CS department and get all those tupils that are in that department. And then I take their intersection and then then I get go get the tupils

that uh that match the intersection or that are still in my intersection result. Then go see whether their their country is US. So visually it just looks like this. Probe the first index, get all the records that are less than 30. Uh, probe this index, get all the records where the department is computer science. Take the middle part, the region here, the intersection, fetch those records, then just do an additional lookup to see whether the country is US, right? Because there's no index for me to do that.

Pretty straightforward. All right. So now we got to talk about how So we now do selects. We do either index scan, a swatcher scan or a multi-index scan. The basic idea is the same, right? And then depending on our our processing model, we're either batching up a bunch of tubles or sending one tupil at a time. It doesn't matter. For tubles that modify the database, insert, update, deletes. Uh we're basically going to piggy back off of the the the basic access methods that we have and all the other operators we have

to to to modify these database so that we don't have to reimplement like in the case of a delete or an update. We don't have to reimplement scan operators to go find tools that match our predicates. We just reuse the scans we used for selects and then now the output of those scan operators are then used to then do whatever the update or delete for insert. The basic idea is that you decide whether you want to materialize the the result as a separate operator or within this insert operator. And I'll

show that next slide. For other operations like upserts, uh merges, truncates, truncates are easy. Just drop the table and then add it back. Right? Upserts are basically scans followed by updates if there's a match or insert. They all they all basically works the same way, [snorts] right? So update, delete, we're just going to use all the the scan operators, access methods we talked about before, and as they pass up the record ids, that's what been used inside these these these modifying operators to then change the

data as we need, right? We got to be careful though to keep track of any tuples that we may may see before because if we'll see in the next slide if if we start scanning data on an index and we start modifying data and we physically put it somewhere back in the table or an index that the the iterator hasn't got to yet then it comes across it again. We don't want to have to modify it or delete it multiple times. For inserts again you either materialize the tool inside the insert operator

itself or you in you modif you materialize on the outside and if you do the last one then you can do like select into you can do like create tables all the select statements like it's really it's easy to compose these things together because you can the insert operator doesn't know doesn't care how tubers are coming into it from down below it in the query plan it just says take this and put it into this table I can do that so but again we had that decoupling of the concerns or the logic

for populating tupal buffers. Then we can have whatever went below us in the query plan generate tupils as long as it's in the right form that we expect following our API. The insert operator can sort anything from anywhere. You can do temp tables and everything uh using this as well. [snorts] All right, so let's see this problem about updating things multiple times. All right, say we have a table of people and we want to keep track of the salary and I want to run a query. We're going to update

everyone's salary. We're going to add $100 bonus or increase their salary $100 in the end of the year if they make that if they make less than $1,100. So the assuming we're going with the the iterative model going from pool base approach from top to the bottom. I start at the top. I'm going to start scanning all the the tuples of my child. It goes down below. And now in this uh second operator down here, then I'm going to do my index scan and it's going to instantiate an iterator that's going to

just scan across all the leaf nodes and find tubless and then emit them up to the next operator. So if they the first thing it finds is me and I make $999. Um so that gets passed up now to the operator above it. We then go inside the for loop, do the update, add $100 to it, and then write it back out to the index. Right? So then now we go down back down to call next on the child operator again. We scan across even further and then now we come across me again, right, with my updated salary. And then now I'm going

to update it twice. That's obviously bat. Right. But what's happening here? The the we're changing the physical location of data in whatever data structure is being used at the leaf operators, right? I'm moving, you know, my record Andy used to be over here because this is indexed on my my salary. But when my salary got updated, it got moved to another physical location on the leaf nodes. And then the iterator goes along and then it finds it again. [snorts] So this is a very famous problem from

IBM. It's called the Halloween problem. And next week's Halloween. So I always like to bring this up, right? So it's an anomaly in a data system emulation that occurs when the physical location of a tupil changes that causes a access method or a scan operator whether it's an index scan or sequential scan to come across or see the same logical tupil multiple times because its physical location has changed. Like logically there's only one Andy, you know, in in in the not the world,

whatever. There's one logical Andy, but physically in my my database during the execution of this query, it physically moved different locations. So it doesn't know it didn't at least the the simplistic implementation, a naive implementation wouldn't know that it's seeing the same logical thing. It just sees distinct physical tupils. So this was discovered by the the IBM researchers in in the 1970s 1976 when they were building system R which is one of the first relational systems ever

built right it has nothing to do with Halloween there's like the original use case wasn't Halloween they discovered this problem on a Friday uh late Friday afternoon when they were building system R and they were like oh this is hard what do we do and they were like oh I don't know it's Halloween let's let's let's let's figure it out on Monday let's go out and drink and they just left the problem then solved it the next week so it just happened that they discovered this on Halloween and went

drinking and didn't solve it that day. That's why it's called the Halloween problem. And there's a Wikipedia article explicitly, you know, calls this out, right? So again, it's just the way to handle this is sort of obvious. You want to keep track of like, have I seen this this logical tupole uh you know multiple times or did I modify this I'm looking at to know I don't need to modify it again. Right? It's it's sort of obvious how to solve how to do this. you have to handle this

in project 3. I'm only bringing this up to say like there's a bunch of logic that I'm not really showing here inside of my scan operators where I'm keeping track of actually what I actually am modifying. And then whether you keep track this track of like here's the things I modified in a separate buffer or you can record in the header the tupil like this thing was modified by me therefore don't look at it again. There's definitely different ways you can implement this

and they will see this in two weeks when we start talking about convergial how to handle it. Okay, so the for the end of this class I want to talk about how we actually handle expressions. So it's sort of obvious we have these wear clauses that we want to evaluate to determine whether tupils match you know whether there's a join or or a filter or whatever it is. So now we have to talk about actually how do you actually execute these things and the way you represent this is just another tree. So within our tree query

plan we're each operator could have its own trees that represent the expressions that they're responsible for at that sort of level or that point in the tree. Right? So for for our our join clause where r ID equals SID and the the wear clause S.V value is greater than 100. Well, this is just a a conjunction between the the the join clause on the two two tuples or two tables and then the evaluation on the value uh based on whether it's you know greater than some constant here right so basically while a

query is executing as you're scanning the data you have to evaluate this tree to determine whether the the predicate matches uh or whatever the the operator is wants to do whether it satisfies this expression defined in this to determine whether you'd be moving tupils up to the next operator or to the next stage in the query plan. [snorts] So let's look at sort of simple example like this. So we haven't talked about prepared statements but um think of it like a macro I can have declare in SQL.

So I have prepare xxx as then I have my select clause and now you can see inside this my select clause I have where s.vow equals dollar sign one. So parameter 1 plus 9, right? And so I call up a pair on my application. I say, hey, I'm going to execute this query a lot. Give it a name xxx. And then now when I want to execute it again, instead of calling that entire select query, I can say execute and treat it like a function, say execute query xxx and pass in the parameters 9991 and that'll get

substituted in dollar one up there. some substance would would the basic idea is like instead of me having to run the query optimizer for every single time I'm going to build this query I can prepare it ahead of time cache it and then re use the the query plan over and over again of course there's trade-offs to this whether it's a good idea or not like depending on for some values I may pass in because I don't know it I don't don't know all the values when I call when I call prepare some might have one

query plan versus another right there's there's no free lunch sometimes it's a good idea sometimes it's a bad idea and different systems do different things. Postgress will automatically generate these prepared statements for you when you run the same query five times, right? Other systems don't do that. All [snorts] right. So, as I'm scanning my my data, my operator, I'm going to have this execution context that's going to keep track of like what's the tuple

I'm looking at, what are the parameters that were passed in when I invoke this query, and what's the schema of the table I'm looking at. So now when I evaluate my tree, different operators in my expression tree are going to need different information from these different from the different context. So all that I want to have ahead of time so that I'm not doing these lookups every single time because I'm trying to rip through this this this expression tree as fast as possible because I'm doing

this on a per tupal basis. I have a billion tuples. I got to walk this tree a billion times and I want this to go as fast as possible. So you basically are doing depth first search, right? I'm going to start at the top or depth first traversal. my equal sign here. I know I want to go down to the left side. So I want to get the value for the the attribute s.val. So I again look up in my execution context and say oh well I know that I need s.vow my current tupil and is at that offset based on the

schema. So I can just again extract out the value a thousand here. Then I traverse down to the the next side of the tree and said all right well this this leaf node here wants parameter dollar sign one. I look at my execution contact see that I'm being passed in 991 as the as that parameter and then I go down to this side here. I just materialize this constant nine nine. They come back up to the addition operator add these two values together get a thousand and then come back to the root and say you know does a thousand

equal thousand if yes emit true otherwise emit false and then whoever invoked this tree to do this evaluation here takes the output and decides okay for as I'm scanning this data does the tuple match this predicate and the tree tells me whether it does or not. Do you think this is a good idea or a bad idea? It works. >> It's what? >> It's good. Why? >> Because it works. >> All right. You know what? I can't. Yeah, I'll take that. Yeah. Can we do better?

>> Compile it. >> Compile it. Yes. And we'll see that in a second. Yes. So it's terrible for the CPU because I just made a big point about how like the materialization model was trying to or vectorization processing model was trying to remove all the overhead of calling next x next but now within you know even I'm passing along a batch of tupils remove those next calls I got to evaluate that tree and that's kind of a bunch of indirection for these function for sorry for these operator pointers

right and that's be that's going to be really slow um so what I really want to be able to do is just evaluate the expression directly and not have to traverse the tree because it's pretty simple what actually what we're doing here right so my my example where sv value equals 1 and I have my tree form of this well that's really just a function called check that returns true if value equals one so if I could avoid that overhead of droing the tree and just invoke this function then be way faster and if I'm

running on a batch of tupless vector vectorization model. I can hope my compiler will automatically autovectorize it using SIMD or if not I could use intrinsics to write it myself. But now I could pass along instead of a single tupole I could pass a batch of tupils. they're all just checking whether something you know the value equals one and that's going to go super fast on uh on SIMD instructions and then their suggestion was to uh compile into machine code and some systems will compile actually the whole query plan

systems like Postgress will compile a portion of it. So let's do a quick demo of that. I'll turn off the uh the light so you guys can see better. So all right so this is going to run Postgress um log in. So I have a um I made a simple table of called fake data with as you'd expect with fake data, right? And it's just just just b much much sorry. Thank you. There we go. Okay. Sorry about that. Right. So it's it's a table with a bunch of fake data. Right. There's nothing

there's nothing fancy fancy about it, right? And I think there is 50 million records. Yeah. Okay. So, first I'm going to do is I'm going to run this special function in Postgress called PG pre-warm. Uh that basically just does a special scan. and it brings everything from the table into the buffer pool. Right? So, I'm going to turn off the just in time compilation for the wear clauses in Postgress. I'm also going to turn off parallel scans um because we'll cover that next class.

And then so I'm going to run some query that produces um I'm going to run some query that does some kind of computation where there's a wear clause. I'm doing a match, but I don't have an index on this. So, I basically have to scan everything to see whether I have a match. So without doing any just time compilation um it's going to take a few seconds and so this I'm running notice how I put explain and then analyze and then I have my parenthesis I want it to give me the

explain output analyze tells it to actually run it and produce the time it takes to actually run it and then buffer just tells me uh tells me like tell me whether you how many pages you read from the buffer pool versus how many pages you read from disk and so it's just for my own sanity I'm making sure that everything in this this this table is is in memory. So it says shared hit equals whatever the the the 200,000 pages. So I know and everything's being read from memory. So this query executed in uh

roughly you know 4 seconds. If I run it again it take about the same. The planning time is telling you how long it takes in the query optimizer. So it takes about 200 milliseconds. Uh and then the query is only take always going to take four seconds. Right? So now if I turn on just in time compilation postgress added this five or six years ago and so what this is going to do it's going to take the wear clause generate the the instructions in the LLVM for in LR for actually executing exactly that

wear clause. So instead of having this like traversing the tree I basically flatten the tree and and generate the instructions to do exactly the work that the tree wants to do. Right? And now if I run it, it should be uh yeah, there we go. So now it took two uh 2.7 seconds, right? Whereas before was taking four seconds. So I save about about a second. But you notice here I there's this extra output here where it says JIT functions equals 4. And then it has the time it takes to do generation

inlining and the optimization. So it looks like it added about uh 381 seconds to do the JIT compilation. So it's paying an overhead up front before it executes the query to do this compilation. But in the end, it made the query run a lot faster. So it was a good trade-off. And Post has its own cost model to determine, you know, it knows roughly how long it takes to uh to jit things. It has an estimate of how long it's going to take to execute the query. So it can decide whether actually to jit

things or not. Uh whether it's worth the trade-off to pay that extra extra cost, right? But Postgress is a row-based system that's doing a uh pool based sorry doing an iterative model with a pool-based approach. So with JIT compilation on and I'm not doing parallel execution here but it would wouldn't make that big of a difference but post best effort here can run this query on on this data in 2.7 seconds. If we cut over to uh duct db and it's should be it's the same data

but I'm execute the same query uh just explain analyze so with ductb duct db is not going to do any query compilation not jet compilation it's going to be do a pushbased column store with a vectorzation model right it completes the query in in half a sec or sorry less than a second right so all the extra machinery that Postgress is doing to JIT things which is not a trivial thing to write in and debug right that's a major engineering effort to add that ductb still crushes it right I'm pretty

sure this is make sure this is single threaded right single threaded right less than a second so again there's engineering trade-offs because process is a column sorry row store and it's using the iterative model you know it's going to be great for OLTP not so great for OLAP but if you design a system specifically for OLAP you know you can do way better and that's what duct DB does fireball click house would all have similar results all right so quickly to finish up for there are some additional optimizations

we can do in our uh in our expression trees other than just compiling it so you can do simple things like constant folding if you ever take a compiler class it's it's all the same tricks but now we're you know it's in the context of databases so it matters more uh Right? So if I say if I see that I'm going to be calling uh the upper function on on the string wuang over and over again. You know if I have a billion tupils I'm going to call this function a billion times for this constant. So I

just say recognize that okay well I only need to actually execute this once compute it once and then inject that as a constant and I never have to call it again. Right? Common subsection elimination is another simple thing you can do. Right? If I see that I in my query I have a conjunction that's basically computing the same thing or sorry disjunction computing the same thing right this string position on X within a column right so this whole portion of the subree over here is the same as this sub tree over here so

rather than me executing it over again over and over again for every single tupole uh duplicatively I can recognize that they're actually the same just rewrite the expression tree to be able to reuse the results of the calculation as it occurs over Right? And the JSON can do this for you automatically. You don't have to rewrite your SQL. I it can try to figure out these the best way to actually execute these expressions in the same way it's going to try to figure out the next best way to execute your query. And we'll see

that next week. Okay. >> Say again. So his statement is and he's correct like if I'm saying like the LVM is going to do this GCC is going to do this clang's going to do this when I still want to do this in my database system even if I the compiler's going to do it. So in case of Postgress they didn't the JIT thing was added six years ago and not every query is going to get the JIT jet capabilities. So you still wouldn't want to do this. There are some systems where they try to use a compiler for

everything. There's an experimental system from the Germans uh where they will use compiler to like a classical compiler to optimize the query plan itself and also you know optimize all the expressions as well to do it all at once. The the the I say the big Germans but the the hyper Germans the umber Germans they will do this as well but then they the the L of them will do its own sort of passive optimizations as well. The reason why they do this separately is because they the way they do compilation is they do in two-stage.

So they'll take your query plan, generate assembly. So they generate x86 assembly, run that in assembler. That's super fast to generate, run that, and then in the background they invoke LLVM to start compiling your query on that assembly. Uh and then when if the compilation finishes before the query finishes, then they slide in the compiled shared object to to replace that. So in the assembled version, the assembler version, if you want that run fast, you still have to do this, but doing doing this is not it's not it's

not hard to figure this out. All right, so the the uh sorry, I just make sure I still recording. All right, so I hope I convey today that like the same query like the same SQL query can be executed a bunch of different ways, whether it's index scans or sequential scans using top down versus bottom up, right? And different data centers do different things. And depending on what your workload is and the environment is that you're trying to target, you want to choose one versus another. In general, for OLAP, you want

to do a definitely do the vectorization model. And then depending on your your engineering tolerance, you could do a pushbased model versus a pullbased model, right? I can't say definitively there's not one better than another because much of a trade-offs for all of them. For LTP, you want to use index scans as much as possible. And therefore uh if you know you're not going to read a lot of data and everything's going to be in memory then materialization model probably be the better way to go right

the expression trees are a nice abstraction for the for to represent expressions and as you said they're good because they work but there's ways to make those go faster. Okay. All right. So so this is all single thread execution. Next class will say how do we take the same things we talked about today and now add multiple workers and how do we combine them results to produce the final result. Okay. All right. Hit it. [music] [music] over [music] the fortune. [music] Get the [ __ ] maintain flow with

the drain. Get the fortune [ __ ] maintain [music] flow with the grain.

