[Music] I'm still ass. [Music] >> It was a good way to start the class, right? Just kind of like the music died out. All right, but a round of applause for DJ Cash. Thank you so much. Uh a lot to cover plus we have a uh speaker today. So let's just jump right into this. Um right so today we're going to talk about the the second half of the material on on query execution. Um so we'll pick up where we left off last class but for you guys in the class again things to cover uh project 2 you

can do this Sunday coming up. The recitation link is available there. And then the special office hours will be this Saturday at um at 3:00 in in Gates building. The midterm uh you can come after class at 4:00 and come to my come to my office hours and check out your grade and look at the solution. Homework four will be released today and that'll be due on Sunday, November 2nd. And then project three will also be released today and that'll be due on November 16th. And then we'll announce the

recitation for that project. Uh it'll be sometime next week. Okay. Um, I had a animation that blew it up. Let me fix it for you real quickly. Um, so there was a major outage in the internet on Mon or Monday in class. Um, everybody hear what what caused it? >> Dynamo DB. Exactly right. The database went down and that broke a bunch of stuff. Right now, the database itself didn't go down. Just DNS getting to it uh went down. But again, just I want to emphasize how important databases are

and why this class is important because you know it's it's the backbone for pretty much everything uh you know any any modern application any modern system and end of the day there's going to be a database and if that goes down then you're you're you're screwed. So one database goes down and that takes down basically half the internet. So that that's pretty wild and so we'll cover DynamoB and DB is a distributed key value store distributed document store uh that uses consistent hashing. We'll

we'll cover that later in in the semester. Um it's a very influential system. All right. So last class we were talking about query execution and we were talking about uh that there's these operators in our query plan that we can that all h all implement the same API uh whether it's like the get next or the the way they're going to be passing tupils between each other that allows us to compose query plans and best any possible query plan could have because we can change the order of of any of

these operators and the the data will still flow through them correctly. Now if you change the order of operators it may produce incorrect query the results might be wrong but that's that's a separate issue we'll cover next class but it's really again I I have these implementation operators uh implications for these different operators and I can move them around and I end up with a query plan that produces a final result at the top that we send back to the application. So there was a brief question last class

about uh you know what what if I have multiple threads or workers processing the query at the same time and I and I sort of punted on that and say that's not what we want to talk about just yet because you don't basically want to understand how we execute queries at a high level. So that's what today's class is about. Today's class is say how do I take one of these query plans and now break it up across multiple workers so that I can run things in parallel. And this all that also then segue us segue

for us into at the end of the semester when we talk about distributed queries right running across multiple machines. Today we're talk about running on a single machine but the same techniques and same concepts same ideas what we're going to do today for doing parallel execution on a single box will uh will still apply when we go when we start scaling out across multiple machines. So the the basic idea of parallel query execution is that we're going to have our database uh will be the physical

database itself will be split across multiple resources. I'm not really defining what a resource is yet. Could be physical machines, could be different discs, it could be different regions of memory uh running on a single box, right? But it doesn't matter just just yet. And so the idea is that we want to be able to handle databases that are too big for a single CPU core or a single disk or a single uh region of memory or single machine, right? And we want to be able to scale things out uh and scale

things up so that we can get better performance and in some cases uh we'll get better fault tolerance redundancy because now the data is replicated ac across multiple machines or multiple discs and so if one of those machines goes down then we have a backup. Of course, if you're if you treat like you know your your the critical infrastructure is running off DynamoDeb and Dynamo DB goes down then you know you could have redundant systems outside of AWS to avoid that problem but uh most people don't do that because it's

expensive and it's hard right but the key thing to understand and this is go back to what we talked about at the beginning of the semester when we talked about SQL being this declarative language where I'm not defining exactly how I want to physically execute my query. The great thing about having a declared link SQL is that the same query that I would write running for for a database running on a single machine or single disk or single CPU whatever that same query in theory should work if I

then scale it up across multiple cores multiple CPUs or across multiple discs or multiple machines right we don't have to define like send data here send data there right in our in our in our in our query plan or sorry in our query the query plan that we generated from our SQL query will define those steps for for us. So it abstracts it all away and we still get the the benefit of of improving the system. So a very common setup is going to be like you as a developer when you're building your

application you'll have your little test database maybe running SQL light or postgress locally on your laptop but then when you want to run on and you you would write SQL queries against that and ideally what you want to have is when you then push your code into production now the database may be this you know behemoth distributed system or running on a much larger machine than your laptop and my same SQL query will still work in that in the production environment right because again from our

perspective when we're writing SQL queries and the application is writing SQL queries it sees a single logical database doesn't know that it may be physically broken up into um into different pieces. So the thing we want to talk about today, today's class we really focus on what I call a parallel database where this is where these resources that we have again where there's computational resources, memory or or storage that they're going to be physically close to each other. And for for today's class,

just assume it's running on the same machine, the same box, the same unit in a rack, right? And so that means that the communication between our different resources is going to be really really fast like reading things from memory or reading things from uh from different discs that are on the same PCI Express bus or whatever, right? And that this this communication be fast and it's going to be reliable and cheap for us to do. And so reliable means like if I go try to read something from disk, unless

the you know the the disc is burning down and there's, you know, it's on fire and I can't do anything, right? I I when I send a message or try to get something data, I'd expect to get that data back, right? In a distributed system, this will again, we'll cover this at the end of the semester, but this will be when the resources in our in our in our database system are not assumed to be physically close to each other like different racks in the same data center, different availability availability

zones or regions or different data centers in different parts of the the country or different parts of the world. Worst case scenario, data centers running in space, right? Right? That was Nibidia's announcement yesterday or today. StarCloud, they want to put GPUs up in space now. Right? So now the latency between sending, you know, sending between different machines, one's in space and one's on on back here on Earth, right? That's going to be super high. And it's not guaranteed be,

you know, to be reliable. And so in our database system, we're going to have to account for the fact that this, you know, anything any message we send or data we try to retrieve may not actually arrive or show up. And therefore, our system has to account for that. In today's class, we're not going to worry about that. we're going to assume that we can read and write to our different workers and they're they're guaranteed to get that message, right? It just it makes our lives a lot easier.

All right, so beginning we're going to talk about different process models, right? These are will be the way you you sort of architect the system itself to have different workers and run in parallel. Uh then we'll talk about the different types of parallelism you could have within a query plan or cross query plans. And then we'll finish up talking about um how to get parallelism with IO. We saw a little bit of this in in project one when you built sort of asynchronous buffer pool or the the disk

manager, but we can see how now we can paralyze this even further. And then we'll finish up with a uh a flash talk from the spyrob guy who's going to talk about the vortex file format. The same speaker that gave a seminar talk with us last semester. But if you didn't or sorry last week if you missed that, this will be a condensed version of that. Okay. All right. All right. So, as I said, the process model is going to be the essentially the the definition of the way in which we've built our our

database system to allow for concurrent requests or current operations or concurrent queries across multiple workers. And the worker is going to be this computational unit of our database system that is is going to be able to execute tasks on behalf of sort of the higher level manager of the system. uh and they know how to do whatever it is that that request is is is being asked for and then return results to whoever asked for it. So you can just think of this like it's a bunch of workers that

could execute queries for you. But the workers also could be doing internal maintenance tasks that are in sort of run in the background to maintain whatever it is you need in the system, right? We saw this before we talked about the log structure mer log structure storage, right? We said there was this compaction thread or compaction thing that then runs in the background and starts coalesing up the SS SS tables and combining them to new ones, right? that that would be a background worker, but it's still still the worker is still

um you know is still a computational unit that the data system has to reason about and understand when it wants to start scheduling tasks. But for this class, we'll just assume that we're going to be executing queries with workers. And the reason why I'm saying workers and and not saying threads, although sometimes I'll I'll slip up and say threads, right, is because there's different implementations of these process models that can have different computational units for for workers.

Right. The two most common ones is have one worker per process like an OS process and one worker per thread. Um most systems are going to the most modern systems are going to implement the second one not the first one but we'll see why people did the first one. uh Postgress does the first one and then it's not exactly a process model but it's sort of a it is a design decision or designed approach for building a data system is do what's called an embedded system where now the data system is not

responsible for getting workers from like the OS or whatever the application that's going to be invoking the data system hands off the workers to the uh to the system to run right so this middle one here is most common the second one the sorry the third one it will be for we'll say like in SQL light or embedded database systems we'll talk about and this top one is is mostly for like the older systems the enterprise systems for historical reasons do this but again we'll go each of these one by

one so the first one first process model approach is called process per worker and the basically is that for every single worker that I have in my system it's going to be its own standalone OS process like I got to call fork on the OS or or on Ze whatever it is to start a new process and that's going have its own address base for its its code, own address space for memory and it's going to rely on a an operating system uh constructs like you know like fork to then dispatch the the you know

these different workers and then can some cases also be responsible for scheduling them because I don't have sort of fine grain control what my workers are or what my workers are going to execute or not. The OS is going to handle that because it just sees a bunch of processes and runs it for you. You can play games about like going to sleep and things like that, but it's that's a bit more work. So the a basic idea is that your your the application doesn't know that there's a bunch of

workers processes. It just communicates with whatever this front-end dispatcher is, right? In Postgress, this is called the postmaster. If you ever if you're running Postgress on your laptop, you'll see a bunch of processes. One be called the postmaster. That's the front-end thing that everyone connects to when you want to connect to the database system, right? And then the dispatcher says, "Okay, well, I have a new connection coming in." they want to execute some queries. Let me pick one of my workers

and my my process pool that I'm that I know about. I hand back that information to the application say here's a you know here's an IP address or a port number for some worker you can go talk to and then now the application reconnects to the worker and it can send SQL commands and and have that worker execute things things for you and the workers can still communicate through with each other when we talk about different types of parallelism in a second. Um but they had to do this through the through either

shared memory or worst case scenario IPC or interprocess communication things like pipes and signals to send data between or communicate between them. In the case of Postgress, they use shared memory. Uh different systems do different things, right? So this is how people built parallel database systems in the old days like like the 80s and in the 90s. And we're take I guess why they did this instead of threads. All right. In Linux now, when you when you create a thread, you spawn a thread, what are you actually calling?

What do you get like Pthread create? Right. Right. What is what does the P and P thread mean? Pix, right? So the Pix API in for Unix and Linux that's been standardized for for threads probably late 90s right mid 90s right before some of you guys were even born. prior to that all the different versions of Unix that were out there right like you know before Linux was was the dominant one but there was you know was BSD there was there was HOX there's AIX there was Solaris all these different um

unices had their own threading packages and so the it had slightly different APIs or different different semantics of what it means to have a thread so and if you wanted to support multi-threading on different Unixes you had to basically rewrite your threaduler and thread implementation across all the different libraries and they made the code less portable. Whereas Pix had basically fork, close, wait, join, like they had basic commands to fork processes. So therefore all the data systems in the

from the 70s, mostly the 80s and like early 90s, they're all going to be doing this approach because at least that was standardized across different different systems. If you ever looked at the Postgress code, the Postgress code has a bunch of pound if you know pound defines or if defafs based on what version of of Unix you're running on and they make different calls for uh you know different OS commands but the end of the day an OS process on Linux is basically perform the same way it does on AIX. So

you can have basically the same semantics across all these things. So any system that's a fork of Postgress uh which I I'm trying to think if there's anybody has done this. No, pretty much anybody that that that is is a system today that's a fork of Postgress is gonna be using this because Postgress uses this and it'll be a major rewrite to to strip out the threading stuff and replace it with sorry strip out the process stuff and replace it with threading. All right, the modern approach is to do

as one expect today using using uh a single process with multiple threads. Right? So just calling spawning Pthread or whatever the Windows 32 create thread is, right? And now all your all your your worker threads are running in the same address space. It's easy for them to communicate with each other because it's all just they're in they you know they can rewrite memory to each other. You still have to use latching all the stuff we talked about before because there's shared data structures and you

don't want the different threads breaking, you know, causing problems with each other. But the basic setup is still the same, right? The application sends something to a dispatcher and either the dispatcher can just forward the request directly to these worker threads or in some cases to remove the bottleneck of having to go through a centralized dispatcher. You can still do the same thing we did before where having the dispatcher sends back to the application, hey, here's a port number

where you can communicate to a worker that's dedicated to you to run queries queries for you and then the application just reconnects and and does that. But the key thing is like all the dispatcher, the worker threads, all this is running in the same same process. So your question is when I say uh that it's using it own scheduling that you're not you could be using a thread pool and not calling predate. >> Yeah. Statement is would I be calling predate every every time a new command

comes in? No. You would have a thread pool but then you can still now you still can do this on a process level. it's a little bit more difficult but like and most the process the process model systems don't do their own scheduling now but I have my own threads I could do like my own non-premptive threading and have have them yield and go back to a thread schedule to decide what to run next basically using co- routines uh you could have you know it's easier to to pause a thread right and

then versus like pausing a process it's more heavyweight right it's just it's more it's a more lightweight it's more lightweight and easier to have complete control over what the threads are than you you would in the process model. Now, you can do it with process, sure, but it's just it's it's more machinery because you're kind of fighting the OS. >> Yes. this lecture today we're assuming Davis is the data system is on one node right so again we're jumping ahead but in a

distributed system you could still have you know either process per worker or or thread per worker but now every node is is running their own you know set of threads set of workers right for our purposes here you know this is just some some disk file whatever it's all the same >> it's not >> it's not mean We'll get there. But basically saying, am I saying this is a parallel database because I have a bunch of worker threads? Uh, yes, but we don't we I haven't defined what the worker threads are

doing for per query. I'm just showing lines coming in like are they all executing the same query or is it one query per thread? Right? Like well few more slides we'll get there. So Oracle started off doing the process per model process model process per worker back in the 80s or 70s when they started and then in 2014 they switched over to now by default they'll run with um with with multi-threading right and again every newer system today would use this approach is because the the threading libraries are so standardized

and everyone's running with Linux anyway so everything works all right so this is not exactly a process model where you have these thinking about in terms of like um threads versus processes. This is just a different approach but is very common um where the the database system is not responsible for calling you know pthread create or forking a process the any computational unit or computational worker has to be given to it from an application that's going to embed the database system right so I know like if

you ever play with like SQLite duct DB like when you when you like open up a duct you call the ductb from the command line and opens up a ductb database like the duct DB command line that is the application right and then it's making calls to the library to do things in a data system but like in the case of something like SQLite I would embed the SQL library in in my application now the application is going to have its own threads to do whatever it wants to do right think of like a web server where

you know requests are coming in but the database server is not on a separate machine it's just running as a SQLite program in the same address space as the as the application So when requests come along the application has you know one its own thread or worker saying I want to read this data from the database and then it makes a request to the database then that's a library call where now that thread is going into the SQL light library or whatever the embedded data system you're using library and then

that is the worker that's going to then read and write data from from the database itself and then when it produc when it gets a result it then gives back you know the the sort of the thread goes back up the stack back to the uh to to to the application calling it and now the data center doesn't have a notion of a worker doesn't have a bunch of pool of workers that it can call upon right it only is given workers when the application goes inside of it right Berkeley DB was one of the first

systems to do this that obviously came out of UC Berkeley and Oracle bought that in the 2000 2006 but like Rox DB uh level DB all these other systems on the side here they essentially work the same way where they don't have their own notion of of of threads or workers. They can only be given workers when when the application calls inside of it. Now, case of in ductb, you can tell it to spawn its own threads as well, but like that's that's um you know, so it's not exactly in in this like in the way I'm

describing here. But this is what basically see how SQLite works. Like SQLite doesn't have background workers. The only workers it has is the ones that the application uses when it invokes SQLite libraries. All right. So the one of the things we're going to be sort of briefly talk about too is how do we going to schedule these things? Again, we haven't quite got into what the the parallelism looks like. But basically the if I have a bunch of workers, the data has to decide where where should they, you know, any

any request worker some task to run uh when should they run it and how they're going to actually going to execute it. Um, so things like if a query shows up and I could run use multiple workers to execute that query, it has to decide what is that degree of parallelism, how many workers do I want to use for that? And and these decisions it'll make way based on how many queries are running at the same time, where's the data, how slow is the disc go get that data, right? And so there's a bunch of these

things the data systems uh can figure out. And this is why you don't want the OS to try to schedule anything for you because since the data system knows what the query is or the tasks are that it has to execute. It knows what resources are available to it. It's always again in a better decision to decide what should actually do to schedule these things. Um and then we should never rely on the OS to do any of this. the the high-end expensive enterprise systems. So the Oracles, the SQL servers, the

DB2s, they will do all of that stuff above and be very sophisticated with scheduling things like Postgress just you know just just lets the OS take the wheel and let lets the OS schedule everything for you. MySQL doesn't do uh parallelism in the way that we'll talk about in a second like they pretty much again let the OS do do everything. All right. So the advantage of using uh a the multi-thread architecture that's the second approach should be pretty obvious right that's the modern way to

build uh build concurrent or parallel applications right there's less overhead of having multiple threads versus multiple processes um you know you don't have to manage this shared memory like which is again relying on OS primitive to to communicate or share share data across the different uh uh the different workers now the of course the downside is if one of those workers hits a seg fault or does something it shouldn't be doing and it crashes in a multi-threaded application that takes down all the

threads takes takes down the entire process. So that in theory could make your data system more brittle or more susceptible to failure because if one thread goes down that takes everyone down whereas like a postgress if one process goes down who cares the postmaster just forks another one and and picks up where it left off. So you obviously like you don't write bugs in your data system so you don't crash but like that's easier said than done right there's pros and cons to this but most

systems are going to choose the multi thread architecture because the engineering overhead the burden is much less and the performance is is a lot more right and unless you're a fork of Postgress or a fork of Reddus which all they're using a single process or the process model most systems in the last 25 years will be using uh using threads >> say it Is it invisible to use? >> His question is, is it inadvisable to use both? Um, I think there's talk in Postgress where you can now have threads per process. I

don't know what they're using it for. Um, in for for Yeah, I would say I would say yes, it's advisable to do both, right? I mean, you could have like the you could do some decoupling where you would have like the the dispatcher could be a separate process and then the and then there's another process that has all the workers inside the same thing. I mean there there's some systems kind of could do that but like you what that gives you is the ability to now move where the the

front end dispatcher runs. You could actually put that on another machine now and have a separate you know the the workers all together on another machine. Different systems do different things in general for single node systems. No one's going to mix it. they're always going to do the the the thread per worker. All right. So now let's get into what sort of he was alluding about like okay what does this mean to actually executing queries and so there's going to be different types of parallelism we

have to uh we're going to we're going to talk about that going to have different trade-offs and different performance uh characteristics. Um and most of the systems that when you think about uh most systems will do always do this first approach. Um the second one is be harder because be different levels of intraquery parallelism. But when people say I have a parallel database they usually think of of this of the second one but the first one still is is a valid category for query parallelism or

sorry for yeah for query parallelism. Right. So the idea is that the data center is going to execute these multiple workers so at the same time. So we can execute multiple tasks at the same time because we want to be able to improve the the the performance of the system or improve its utilization of the hardware that's available to us. Right? Most modern CPUs, right? Pretty much all modern CPUs at the server level or even your laptops, we're going to have multiple cores. Like every laptop

basically has what, eight cores per CPU on the the higherend AMD boxes, you now have, you know, hundreds of cores. Um so we want to take take to be able to take advantage of all that, right? And all the approaches that we'll talk about today are still like from this point forward. It doesn't actually matter whether we're doing process per worker or thread per worker. Again, the high level concepts are still the same. The way we're going to paralyze things and coales results uh at the right point in

the query plan, all these still work no matter what process model you're using or even even if you're running on multiple machines, right? All right. So, we're going to talk about interquery parallelism and then we'll talk about again more detailed intricate parallelism. Interquery parallelism is is pretty obvious. It basically says if I have multiple workers, I could take multiple requests for queries and I can execute those queries in in parallel, right? Meaning like one worker could

execute query one, another worker could execute query two, right? And they they don't need to communicate. They don't need to interfere with each other, right? For scheduling wise to do this again, most systems are going to use a really simple scheduler policy. First come, first serve. Like whenever cruise shows up first, I'll start running that right away. things get a little more complicated when you start doing transactions and concurrent which we'll cover in a few weeks. But you can start

scheduling things based on uh you know if you're in a transaction how much work how many queries have they executed before you before this new query and maybe that gets a higher priority or lower priority based on whatever policy you're using. So if every query you're executing is single sorry is is um is readon then this is really easy to do because you don't have to worry about uh you know coordinating between the different queries. You still want to maybe do latching on on your internal

data structures because you don't want queries to to break things or interfere with each other. But in general read only databases are the easiest way to easiest thing to implement because the coordination level is is amount of coordination you have to do is pretty minimal. Like once the queries start running, you don't have to worry about them sending data back and forth between each other or understanding what one query is doing versus another query is doing. And then if you now want to make

sure that like I can get parallelism by like or reduce the amount of wasted IO, the bufferable manager can do all the scan sharing or all the the the all the other the cursor sharing techniques we talked about before because that's kind of the central point that everyone's communicating with. But again, that's that's we already covered how to how to do that. If queries have updated at the same time, now you got to worry about like who writes what and when who can read whatever's been written. That we'll

cover in in two weeks. We'll pick that up on on lecture 17. We'll spend two weeks discussing how how to handle this. Uh starting then I would say also too that just because a database system can execute multiple queries in parallel at the same time doesn't mean necessarily that each query itself will also run in parallel with within itself. Like so my SQL will be a interquery parallelism system like it can take multiple query requests and run each of those at the same time but for each individual query

request that's always going to only going to run on on one worker. So if I if I run one query in my SQL and I have a thousand cores at the end of the day it's still going to run on one core. So that type of parallelism is called intraquery parallelism. And these aren't mutually exclusive. I can have an interquer inter I can have my data system support interquery parallelism then also supports intraquery parallelism. So postgress can do this. Post can m run multiple queries at the same time and each of those

queries can run on multiple workers at the same time right. So if you remember like the producer consumer model, right? You have you have basically in uh in a query plan you're you're you have different workers different actually in different parts of the query plan producing results that that it's pushing up or moving up to the query plan and then depending on how I break things up in my pipelines, I could have different workers consuming those results and maybe running those in parallel or waiting for all the results

to be finished before I can go off and execute the next pipeline. Right? But the high idea is going to be still the same. is still going to be this producer consumer approach. So the first type of parallelism we'll talk about is intraoperator paralism. So this will be horizontal parallelism. So so allowing different workers to execute the same pipeline or different portions of the pipeline at the same time or sorry same pipeline but different segments of the data or different inputs at the same time and that's super

common. uh the other type of parallelism called interoperative parallelism where I could have different workers execute different portions of of of the query plan simultaneously at the same time and that's less common because obviously if you have pipelines I can't maybe execute something at the top before something at the bottom finishes so it doesn't make sense to have something up above spinning and waiting for results that haven't that are never going to arrive yet so they're going to be parallel

versions of pretty much every operator that are out that's out there and basically all the algorithms that we talked about so far in the semester you can easily or not easily You can paralyze them in some ways by using that divide and conquer approach that we talked about before that allow you to split the the input up for your algorithm into different segments or different buckets or whatever how we defined it before. And now instead of having one worker go through each bucket or each partition one at a time, you

have multiple workers each handle a different partition at the same time. So we go to that back to that that parallel hash join the grace hash join we talked about before the partition hash join where we do sort of one pass through the data and build you know and hash the data and build up these these sort of levels in our hash tables or different segments but instead of having again one worker handle each of these levels once I sort of do my first pass which I can do also do in parallel we'll

see that in a second but now when I want to do my join I have one worker be responsible for level one worker sorry level zero one worker responsible for level one and so forth. And because I know I've partitioned my data by doing the hashing step first, I don't have to communicate between different workers to do this. Right? Now, you could do this either by having a one giant hash table or you could partition have so individual hash tables. It doesn't matter. The high level concept is still the same.

All right. So, we'll go through what interoperator parallelism is. It's the horizontal one. uh and then the interoperative parallelism that have different portions running at the same time that's vertical and then the textbook talks about this thing called bushy parallelism uh they make it sound like its own separate thing but it it's just the combination of the two of them at that's the same time right so the first one is the most common one anybody anytime someone says they have a

parallel data system they're they're nine times out of 10 or 99 times out of 100 they're doing the first one the horizontal parallelism and then the second one is less common we'll look at it briefly and then the bushy parallelism that's in again the enterprise high-end systems that cost millions of dollars like a SQL server, like DB2 and like Oracle. But the top one, the horizontal one is the most common one. And again, because SQL is declarative, I don't have to specify in

my query which one of these I want, right? The Davidson just figures it out based on the hardware has available to do it, what your query actually wants to do. It can decide which which of these approaches it wants to use. All right. So the most common one is horizontal parallelism or intraoperate parallelism. And the idea is that I'm going to take my my my data that I'm processing and I'm going to break it up into disjoint subsets right either by just saying you know you read this page

these pages I'll read these pages or doing something more explicit like dividing it based on values and columns. It doesn't matter. And then now the the the operators are going to be have different independent uh imple or instantiations of them that can each run on a different worker that are going to be processing the data that they're assigned to uh for the inputs you know again a disjoint subset of the data and then they're going to be crunching on that producing results that

I then move up into the query plan. But then at some point I need to make sure that I've processed all the data from these different uh pipelines or instantiations of the pipelines or the different workers. And so now I want to introduce a a barrier operator that says don't proceed in my query plan until I get all the results from everybody below me that I'm expecting to produce results for me. So this is be called uh in databases called the exchange operator. And it's basically you know there's no

notion of this. So there's no mapping of this to the relational model or relational algebra. This is something we're going to do in introduce in our implementation to allow us to do this achieve this parallelism. Again, just think of like a barrier where it it it blocks the the output uh or sending a signal to up above to say you can start processing the data. I' I've finished until it gets all the results expects to get from its children operators. So uh if you're familiar like in in

programming languages I think they call this like a merge operator or a gather right or scatter gather this basically the same idea right post calls these gather gather merge and you're just combining the the different results from the from the child operators and producing them as as a final result that go that goes up above >> yes >> I'm just curious why does it need to be a barrier because I would think in some cases like you can gather like partial results and just send them up like why

do you need The question is why do I why does it have to be a barrier where I block things in isn't it in some cases where I can send partial results up? Uh yeah, but again think of like the pipeline breaker. There's some places where I can't I can't proceed until I get all the results. In that case you wouldn't you wouldn't use the exchange operator. >> Let's keep going sometimes. >> Sometimes you can sometimes you can't. So is an issue that this is not power

>> um yeah so yeah he's correct that there are some cases where I don't have to block until I get all the results you can send some results out for simplicity assume what we're blocking here for assuming this is a pipeline breaker then I'll show different versions of exchange operators that don't have to do do what you're saying start starting with the basic one it blocks but then we we'll relax All right. So here's our query we want to do. We want to join A and B, right?

And we have a a filter on the some some value that's for each of these tables. I do a join and then I have a projection at the top, right? So say I want to do the processing of this on table A first. So I've partitioned table A into three disjoint sub subsets. Now it could again be page based or rangebased, could be based on the value because I've hashed whatever my joint key is. It doesn't matter. I'm going to assign those three subsets of A to my my three workers, right? And each of them are going to run

basically up the pipeline that I have and run in parallel because they're processing different portions of the table. They don't need to communicate with each other. So they can run independently of of of the others. So each they're all going to do the the filter and then now they're all going to do the sort of the this side of the hash join to build the hash table, right? And so now I have an exchange operator uh where up above that says this pipeline or these this portion of the

query plan is not finished until all three of my workers down below me come up and tell me that they're done. So maybe it should be a black line for control and some data like so I'm not really moving data for this case here into my exchange operator because this build hash table thing is kind of assume there's some hash table that it's a global hash table they're all updating but my exchange operator needs to know that they're all done processing their portion of table A before I can proceed

with the next you know the next part of the query plan right so they're all generating data for this hash table here and then now uh once I know this is done I can then schedule uh three other workers or three of the same workers just now running different portions of the query plan. Now they're processing table B which I've broken up into three three subsets as well and do the same thing. They're they're going to do a filter in parallel and then now they're going to do the probe of the hash table

in parallel. Again, it's a single hash table. They're all reading into and and looking for results. And then if any matches, they then do the projection. But then above that, I have another exchange operator that says I'm not I can't produce the final result for this query until I know that my three workers down below me running these, you know, these portions of the pipeline that they've all finished processing the data that they have. So going back to his point here, these

exchange operators are blocking because I can't I don't want to start doing the the probe and the hash table here on on the the probe side for table B until I know that all three workers that were were building hash table have completed because I don't want to get a false negative. I don't want to probe into the hash table looking for a match but the worker that is responsible for putting that my match into the hash table hasn't completed yet. So in this case here that again the the the exchange operator is

is blocking is a barrier. It doesn't necessarily have have to do that right and then the the I'm not showing here but there's some metadata in my query plan that keeps track of these pipelines and keep track of of these dependencies and would know I want to schedule the workers that process table A uh segments first before I jump to anything on table B. So this is again this is the most basic simple sorry the most most common and most basic type of of exchange operator I it's doing a gather and it's combining

results for multiple workers and producing as as a single output stream and again depending on whether or not I I I'm allowed to process the data at the same time or not whether it's a blocking exchange or it's uh it's just producing a single exchange again depends on what the operator is actually doing below me. um and the data system would would know how to do that. Another type of exchange operator is to do what's called distribute and and for this here I'm using the SQL servers

terminology for this. uh different data systems might call it might different things but all the high level ideas are still the same with a distributed exchange operator is that I'm taking a single input stream from some some operator down below me which again I don't care what it is below me just I know that I'm getting tupils up from from below and passing them up and then now I'm going to redistribute uh or repartition that data across different operators that I can run in parallel at

the same time different workers and the last one is uh called repartition and that's just a combination of of the the the top one and and the middle one where I could take multiple input streams from different operators down below me and then I'm gonna produce multiple output streams, but it doesn't need to be a onetoone correspondence between the number streams coming in and the number streams coming out. Like I may decide that I have a lot I want to use a lot of parallelism because I have a lot of data

down below me, but then up above I maybe want to only run on two workers. So I'll coales the three streams into two two output streams and only have two workers run them in in parallel, right? Because you know the coordination cost or sending data between different nodes is not for free. Uh and so there's a trade-off between how much parallelism I have versus how much communication cost I'm going to pay to to send data around. So some data systems like Google's BigQuery or Dremel, it's the

same system. Um they'll always do this for every single pipeline, every single stage query execution. And this allows them to get to to basically on the fly decide do I want to scale up or scale down the number of nodes I'm going to use to process my query. Again, that's distributed databases. We'll cover that later. Uh but you can do the same thing on a single node thing and saying I I I want to run this portion of my query plan with with 10 workers. But then since I'm doing a bunch of filters and

and and whittling down how much data I have at at this at this exchange operator here, I only want to have two output streams because I only want two workers to process the remaining results. Is this clear? And again to his point is it does it need to be a barrier or not? depends on what the what the operator is doing uh up above and below like depending on whether you need to see all the results or you can start seeing the results as they arrive. If you can start processing the results as they arrive, this allows you to do

what's called interoperative parallelism with vertical parallelism where I'm going to have different operations in my query plan actually execute at the same time. uh that would allow me to basically was again pipeline data between them without having to materialize results or stage them for for transfer from one upper to the next. Um and you typically see this in in what are called streaming systems, streaming database systems where it isn't like I have a a table that's a fixed size and I run my query and I

produce whatever the result is at that moment that I run the query. In a streaming system, it's like a continuous updates, continuous insert stream of new data coming in. And I want to run this query forever continuously. And it can then produce results, you know, on on a on a schedule like every 5 seconds produce a new result, whatever it's seen before. Or if there's some trigger mechanism say uh if I see data that, you know, we see a stock price that goes above $100, then output a

result. Like there's a bunch of mechanisms you can do to produce results. and think of like there's this data always coming in and I want to be able to run these things in parallel because I I don't have to wait for maybe all the data to show up because it's it's it's it'll go to infinity, right? It'll just the new data is going to come in forever, right? So let's look at sort of contrive example here. So say now I'm doing the same join I had before, but now I have

this UDF or function I'm calling on the data. I think of like, you know, hashing of a hash of a hash some real expensive operation that I'm doing for my for my data. And so if if what I want to be able to do is not wait for get all the results of this join to finish before I start calling that UDF because that's going to be expensive and I want to put that on a separate worker to have that run in parallel, right? So I'll have one worker responsible for doing the join and then it's going to sort of emit

tupils out as it finds matches and then that's just going to pass it up to now to my second worker that's going to just continually read this input stream incoming and then compute the whatever that UDF or the function call is and produce output that way. So now I could have this this thread just sort of rip through do the join and then immediately hand off the result to some other thread that's going to rip through and you know compute whatever the hashing function that I want to compute. And then of

course now if at some point if if it completes the incoming uh it's processed all the tupils that it's seen so far but the bottom guy is still running it just blocks and waits for the second guy the bottom guy to notify him that there's no result for you. This is the pipeline. >> This is the pipeline. Yes. >> But like in theory, you know, you could have like the I'm just trying to say like the the the function call the projection could be inside this thing here, but I want to be able to separate

them. But again, it doesn't come for free. I got to communicate and send data up. I got to copy data. So it's it's more expensive to do than just fusing everything all together inside the for loop. But I can I can by breaking it up I allow I allow to get suffocate parallelism that way. Okay. So the last one is bushy parallelism. And as I said this is just you know a combination of interoper inter intra and interoperative parallelism. Um where you have different workers going to be running on different

portions of the data at the same time and different workers be running different segments of the of the query plan at the same time. So this is a contrived example uh like I'm doing a a cartisian product or cross join between four tables A B C and D but I could have the the the bottom part here doing a join and that can just run in separate workers and that just can crunching through and computing results and then as they get output I could have another set of workers doing the building the

hash tables and then doing the joins and all these can can can run in parallel to produce my final result again. So I'm getting the going back here. This is the this bottom portion here is the intra operator parallelism. So within uh within my query plan I'm having different portions operate on the same thing and I each of these ones I could I could fork out multiple times and then within the same query plan I can me also scale up the the number of workers that are different running at the same time

for different parts of the query plan. So that's the the vertical parallelism will merge BCD and then it will >> the question is like is this sorry this is doing you know this is doing cartigian products like take join of AB it's going to produce all combinations of A and B uh and this take all combinations of C and D and now you produce all combinations all together. >> Is this the is it Is this an optimized or is this exactly what? >> The question is like is this an optimized

>> binary operations? >> Like is this an optimal query plan? It depends on the data, right? It may be better to join A followed by followed by joining C and then followed by joining D. This is called a bushy join. We'll see this next class. Like in some cases it may actually this some system sometimes this is better. Most systems will actually not give you a query plan that looks like this. They'll give you like left deep joint. So I'll join A, take the output of that, join C, then

join D. Right? Because the the computational complexity of searching for this plan is super high. So people don't do it. See the camera wants to wants to look at him, not me. See if that works. Okay. All right. Other questions? All right. So we know how to use multiple workers now execute per queries in parallel, right? Uh and this is great if we have a lot of CPU resources and we're CPUbound, but oftent times we're not going to be CPU bound. What's going to be the slowest thing? Disk. Now in the modern

era, discs have gotten really really fast uh in the last 5 years. Uh so many times CPU is going to be the bottleneck for us. But uh depending on where our data is actually being stored, if it's on S3, right, some remote storage, that's always going to be way slower than anything we can do on the CPU side, right? So just because we have multiple workers, uh we may still not get the parallelism and then performance improvement we want because the end of the day we're reading writing pages from

disk and that's going to be super slow. So this is where IO parallelism comes in. And the idea is that we want to split our our database or databases plural uh across multiple storage devices so that we can we can sort of get the the benefit of uh of improved bandwidth to disk because we're reading from from multiple devices, right? So there different bunch of ways we can do this, right? We can have multiple discs per database. So again, it looks like a single logical database but it's split

across multiple physical discs. We can do one one database per disk, one table per disk, right? or we can take a single single table and split across multiple discs. All right. The the high-end systems will allow you have complete control over all these different factors. Like in Oracle, you can specify exactly like the location of data uh for tables. Uh you can specify where you want the write ahead log is, which we haven't covered yet, but that's basically think of the log recovery log.

I can put that on one one disk and put the database itself, the actual tables themselves on another disc. So I get the parallelism that way. Progress to control this a little bit with what they call table spaces. But often times the the the the I won't say the lower end systems but systems like my SQL for example they don't have a notion of physical locations of of the data but you can basically do the same thing at the administrative level by using like sin links and things like that to put put

files in different devices but the data itself is not aware of the locations of the the the characteristics of the disc that that it's reading from or writing from just sees that you know a single single disc location sees a single logical uh file system. So the you know should be obvious why we want to do this. But now there's a bunch of trade-offs we have to consider when we want to start start splitting our database and putting on different files or different locations on disk. And it's

very similar to the trade-offs we'll see in a distributed system of where we start putting the data across multiple nodes because sometimes it'll make things go faster but we'll have less guarantees about the durability and safety of our data. Or we could have great durability and safety of our data. But now things are going to go a lot slower because now I got to make sure everybody is synchronized and and and up to date. So say really trivial example. I have six pages and this is what we just sort

of see at the the sort of logical level. I have six pages. I don't really know where they're being stored, but I know I can I can address each of them. And so now if I want to split this across the uh you know say three disks we're going to sort of way say the two extremes would be mirroring it everywhere versus striping the data and in in practice you're going to do something in in between the two of them. So if you're ever familiar with RAID like the way you sort of redundant array of independent

discs um RAID zero level is is where you just you're just striping where basically do roundroin writing of the data. So page one goes to the first disc, page two goes to the second disc, page three and so forth. Right? So each page only exists in in one physical disk at any time. So now anytime I want to read data, I go to one disk and I get the page I want. And if I have to write the data, I go to one p one one disk and write that data. And if I have multiple queries or multiple workers trying to

readwrite data at the same time, I get the parallelism that I want across different discs because one worker could be going to dis first disk, another worker could go to the second disc. you ignoring bandwidth issues of getting data up to memory, right? We ignore that for now, but I can get the parallelism I want because because now these things are completely independent of each other. Of course, the downside is that if I lose one disc, then I lose one throw of my database and that could be, you know, that could be catastrophic.

Okay, if it's your bank account on that disc, you care. The other extreme is called uh RAID one or mirroring where that's where for every single every single disk page I'm going to write that to all my discs complete copy of it and then I don't report back to the so the data server the disk manager that my data has successfully been written until I successfully fsync across all these all three storage devices. So this makes reads go really great because I can still now u I can read any page I want

from any disc and now I can have a load balancer above this deciding you know what disc I want to have so I maximize bandwidth across all of them course but of course this makes rights go bad or go slowly because now I got to update the same page across three different discs and make sure they're all in sync before I report back to the application that I that you know I've successfully stored your data you access to. So two different ways to do this. One is that you can buy storage devices that have a

built-in IO controller that can do this mirroring for you, right? But this actually would be transparent to the database system because it'll look like a single logical file system, but underneath the covers, it's it's storing the data across different ways. Um, a better approach and what most systems are going to do is sort of software based. So I don't mean like software raid where it's it's the file system level but now inside the data system itself I'm basically have code that that

can do the different types of of these storage layouts uh inside my own data system because now I know where the data is being stored. I know the implications of like losing one disc versus another disc, right? I have all complete management of everything. And again this is what the high-end systems will do for you. Like Oracle has has a bunch of uh capabilities in the space. It's faster. It's more flexible than just relying on again transparent RAID or transparent hardware to do this for you. But again, you only see this

you only see the software one doing all this kind of stuff in in the expensive systems. So there's this trade-off between how how fast I want my data systems to be, how safe or durable I want my data to be, and then my storage capacity, right? because I have to buy more disc now if I'm mirroring everything and having complete copies of my database cuz because you know if my database is one terabyte I can't you know I can't use a bunch of smaller disc and get get the composite one terabyte I

need I have to have one terabyte per disc because I need to copy the whole thing the whole database inside that that disc at a time so in the database world if you really care about data and you don't want to lose data chances are you usually have money and so you put you you don't go cheap on your database system. And so capacity is less of an issue. It's more of the trade-off between durability and performance because you just throw more money at it to get more capacity, right? I say that, but like you know 99%

of the databases are running on the same box as the web server. Uh which you're not supposed to do, but everyone does because if it's WordPress, who cares, right? But like think of like your bank, think of like Visa, Mastercard, big, you know, big uh financial companies. they have infinite money and they really care about those two factors and capacity is less of an issue. But of course now this means like your database system is running on expensive hardware and like you don't want to put r you

know you don't want to put a lot of data in it uh stupidly because then you're you know you're just makes it even more expensive and you run out more capacity and you have to manage it that way like that's a separate issue. uh this is mostly an issue for for for transactional workloads in the cloud. Now everyone just runs on S3 and that's infinite capacity and they they'll handle the durability for you and performance is is depends on you know how much how much parallelism you can

you can get reading data out how much you want to cache things on the local side that's distributed database problem we'll cover that later all right so another thing we have a handy about today as well is partitioning uh this basically to take a a single table or or a database and you want to split it up into these disjoint subsets And I was being handway about it saying like, oh, you could just split on bas ranges of ranges of pages or you could hash a value like we did in the divide and conquer stuff with hash tables to

split things up. I'm being handw about that because we'll cover that more in in uh in a few weeks. But the the data system has again has complete control over where it's writing data to and understands that the you know there's this disc there and there's that disc there and this data needs to go with this disc or that disc like it can make better decisions about how it wants to uh split things up and partitioning is is one of the ways that's going to be able to do this for us. And we'll see

different types of partitioning where we can now take a single logical table and then split split up to these disjoint subsets that we can then route to different uh storage devices separately. And again, we don't have to rewrite anything in our application code at the SQL level because we're just accessing tables. We don't know how things actually being physically split up and how things be running in parallel. All that is hidden for us. Ideally, most systems that that's the case. We kind of

saw this before when we talked about um you know column sources row stores right row store was like taking all the the data for a single tupil and they were just sort of contiguous with each other in in a single page and then with the column store we were saying oh take the you know take just the data for for one column across all the tupils in a table and store that in a separate page that's basically the same thing as vertical partitioning I'm splitting my my my table up my my record up into uh

different pieces based on the columns and I now store them in separate files separate pages, separate storage devices. Right? So, we've seen this technique before, but we'll we'll see it more explicitly when we talk about distributed databases because that's going to be how they're going to scale out um across multiple machines. All right. So, to finish up, so par execution is is is is super common and it's how the data sim is going to be able to get the the better performance,

right? taking advantage of the additional computational resources and storage resources that are now available to us in you know in in modern world like your cell phone has more threads or more CPU cores then like the database systems from the 1980s right it's infinitely faster but it has more computational power more you know threads more more cores that they can take advantage of so you need to design your data system to be able to to use all these things we'll see this later on but like the the the the multiple

workers also going to allow us to do not just hide the disc latency like I got something from disk or from across the network. I can have other threads keep or other workers keep running while my thread is my worker is paused but we're going to be able to do the same thing now when we run uh multiple queries that want to update the data set at the same time in parallel because now I can basically control who can run what and when and I would know that this thread or this worker for this query is waiting

for this other query to finish commit whatever whatever changes it's made before my query can start running. Hello. >> Shoot. Sorry. >> Me pause that. >> All right. Sorry. Um, so I I can run these multiple workers at the same time and I can have complete control of who's allowed to run one rod to run when based on the data they want to modify, the data that other queries have modified. So we have complete control of everything in our database system and we know exactly what every query wants to

do. we can then make the best decisions on how to paralyze things instead of just letting OS take the wheel and do whatever it wants because it doesn't know what the queries actually want to do. Okay. All right. So, next class will be us discussing begin discussion about uh how do we again take a SQL query and generate the that physical plan that we then can actually execute and it's not just deciding what the shape of the query panel looks like. So he was asking you know you know I showed a sort of

what I call a bushy joins where I'm joining was A and B and C and D and they were done run in parallel and they take the output of those joins them together. Do I, you know, the do I generate plans that look like that or do I join A and B first followed by C followed by D or do I join B first A first like all those decisions what what the actual physical plan is going to look like that's what we'll start talking about on uh on Monday next week and again I fully admit this is this is going to be the hardest

part about database systems do query optimization so we'll go through it at a high level first about how to how how we're actually going to search for different plans and then on Wednesday next week we'll talk about how we cost them to decide whether one plan is actually better than another. And the dirty secret is going to be it's not a dirty secret. It's it's it's well known. Everybody's career optimizer is terrible. Everybody does a terrible job at this. The question is how are you how

worse are you compared to other database systems, right? And the challenge is going to be is because you're basically making decisions on on incomplete data. Like I can't know exactly what the query is going to do until I run it. But I got to decide what I'm going to do before I run it. And so they'll have these summaries and statistics to try to try to extrapolate what the data actually looks like. But everyone's going to be terrible at this, right? Uh and so we we'll understand why more next week, but

on Wednesday, but Monday's class will be mostly about like how do we actually structure these things. Okay, >> thanks for having me. Um if you saw my talk a week and a half ago, some of this will overlap quick. I'm CEO Spiral. Before that, I guess the most relevant thing is uh this is was I was one of the key people behind Foundry at Palunteer. So, this is hopefully my second successful exabyte scale database thing. Um I'm actually going to start with like a bit of a history lesson, ancient

history. I guess most of you are undergrads. You don't even remember 2005 probably. Anyway, 2005 was about when Dennard scaling ended. So, that's uh that was the end of cores get faster. like CPUs today are kind of the same gigahertzish as CPUs from 20 years ago. Um, but Mo's law continued because we moved to sort of multipprocessor CPUs. Um, this is hardware from 2005. If you need a reference point, we all play the same cell phone game. Um, this is exactly what I'm saying. You can see the

sort of shift around 2005 to now there are two cores, but the black line represents clock speed and there was a real switch over. I'm saying Mors law though continued up and to the right harder in 2015 was actually I think still sort of reckoning with this like we moved from single cores that were really fast to lots of cores and so if you think of the era of Hadoop um or MSOS and later Kubernetes that was sort of like how do I manage lots of cores and eventually lots of machines that are sort of providing yet more cores um it

was all about managing these large homogeneous pools of resources Um there was sort of a speed hierarchy like RAM was faster than the disk. Disk was faster than the network. Um there was an ongoing move from migrating from on-rem to the cloud. Uh again showing my age I definitely remember like wrapping servers in weird places. Uh and then you know now that's a bit less common. Uh this is MSUS. This actually fun bit of trivia was out of the same lab that produced Spark and actually Spark was

meant to be a proof of concept of how to run stuff on MSUS. But then now MSIS is pretty much is dead and Spark is you know Spark went on to eat the world. What's different now 2025 computers is heterogous. So sort of GP GPU compute um is probably here to stay. you know, all your money goes to Jensen Huang. Um, if you get the mean reference of all your base belong to us, good. Um, the other thing is that that speed hierarchy I talked about still holds for latency, but doesn't hold any more for bandwidth

or throughput. So, network cards have dramatically more bandwidth than a PCIe bus. So, that's to say that like sort of copying from RAM to a GPU has, you know, potentially much less bandwidth than copying over the network. and storage generally um is both faster and slower. So I think there's been a a bifurcation away from sort of hard disks like spinning physically spinning HDDs um towards object storage which are backed by physically spinning HDDs um typically and NVMe which is sort of ultraast

um that actually stands for basically nonvolatile memory express effectively that's the thing they're ultra fast discs um on local device and then now we're seeing multicloud setup s are prevalent especially amongst those the various like AI players or anyone doing GPUs because they essentially need multiple providers and so starting to see onrem is kind of coming back um their neoclouds like coreweave are having a bit of a moment paralleling all of that is what I usually talked about sort of three

errors of databases postgress actually predates all of us but you can think of it as even some of the decisions in postgress around like uh process per connection predate when you know it cores were getting faster but post was designed originally for human data in and human data out like you know you might look at your profile which is a row and update the email address and it sort of I think posgress while it's expanded beyond that as I say it's the king of databases um is still fundamentally row oriented and

it's sort of archetypically an application database afterwards around all the stuff I said about Hadoop MSOS, multi-core processors, big data. That was the late as um through most of the 2010s was where we automated data collection. And so there were sort of the we still had like machine what I would call machine scale data in but human scale outputs. You might distill terabytes into a chart or a table in a dashboard. And um I think Andy and Michael Stonbreaker had a really great paper sort of talking about

this whole era. Um and it's like you know a lot of it was let's throw out all the stuff we we think we know all the Postgress things all the tables the future is map produce and data links and NoSQL um and all of that was really those were strategies of dealing with I think in many ways um the shift in the underlying hardware. So moving from sort of like single CPU to to many CPU um and so we had to manage this multi-core parallelism and these uh sort of revolutionaries for lack better way to

put it unlocked a lot of short-term scale um you know I like to make fun of webcale um as a as a concept but in the end they came back around to sort of tables that are useful after all and that's what people refer to today as the lakehouse um this is how I feel roughly about everything, not just hive, but the entire lakehouse concept, which is someone decided to take a bee and elephant and somehow hybridize them in a weird way. It's like lakehouse tables, I think, often more like duct typed and

duct taped together. Um, we're now in what I describe as the machine consumer era. So, we're starting to see a demand for databases where the output is massive. And so you know you get machine scale data in and we have queries where the result set might be sort of need to be like sent at terabytes per second like the result set can be many terabytes egressing the system. And so this is pretty different. The most obvious case is something like GPU data loading. GPUs happily consume terabytes per second. But it leads to

sort of different database design including around like hybrid compute for example becomes the default. And this is where spiral sits. I sometimes describe spiral as building for complex data at machine scale. And so um what I mean by complex data is actually like unstructured I think is a misnomer. So images are highly structured. Audio video highly structured vectors and tensors insanely structured. Um typically not well served by classical database systems. Uh I think you know I put this paper here uh from

uh TUM which is like why files if you have a DBMS it's like there is I think files are strictly inferior to a DBMS. It's just that existing DBMS's have sort of not served a bunch of use cases. So uh practitioners fall back down to the lowest common denominator. So spiral is an object store native multimodal column store with primary keys and indexes. There's a lot there to unpack. We're not going to get to all of it today, but we optimize for throughput. So, like I said, you know, the my my party trick is

I can actually run a dynamic query uh where I get more bytes or tokens per second loaded into a GPU than if you prematerialize the results of that query as paret on local disk. Um, which is kind of I think mindbending to a lot of people. And like I say, it has to support hybrid compute across many fronts. So PyTorch is pretty important for the GPU use case, but we also need to be able to support things like polers or duct DB because actually in practice there's a lot of data exploration that happens on

basically any data set and uh people want to inspect some working set locally. They say here example workloads there's classic columner analytics even for these sort of AI oriented workflows. I think filters are really important. Um, index lookups. Anytime someone talks about a vector database, it's really just a server that holds a vector index. Um, I think in general that's not the only kind of index. You know, they're inverted indices. There's also secondary indices. Um, we maintain those you have

to do lookups. That's particularly relevant. Sometimes that the third one which breaks the world is pre-training which will be like filter by this 50% density mask. So literally I need half the rows but a very specific half of the rows. Um and I need those to be sharted and then shuffled. So sort of grouped together and then set where each group is loaded into deterministic or like reproducible order. So it's no longer a bag of rows because that's how sort of these things work when you go through

various epochs of curriculum training. Anyway, the only as I said for my party trick of loading more tokens per second um into a GPU than a prematerialized result, the only practical way is to actually stream bytes straight from object storage because object stores like S3 give you actually effectively infinite throughput so you can get you know the goal is can you saturate the network card which has more bandwidth than the PCIe bus and then the file format in S3 defines how the bytes are actually stored. So QED, we care a lot

about file formats. This is mostly a teaser. I gave a longer talk in in Andy's sort of like future data system seminar last week. If you didn't see it, you can see it on YouTube. Here's my teaser about Portex. This is why we made a file format. A lot of work we do at the company is around this file format. It's actually a Linux Foundation project now, so doesn't belong to the company. Um, but you know, it turns out we're not the only ones that kind of want to replace Parquet, which is the deacto

standard. And so, you know, naturally, well, this this XQCD comes to mind. And it turns out that's exactly what happened. There are lots of new file formats because turns out that park is a pretty crusty, slow standard that needs lots of improvement. And this is from Andy on Hacker Days like two weeks ago. I usually put my thing in I think we're in the sweet spot. I'm biased. You know, we have open governance and industrial strength implementation and then we're at the cutting edge. And I think there

are lots of other ones I can say the the work on fast lanes and and F3 and Nimble are all very much cutting edge but you know it's like how do you get the intersection of all these three things that's my pitch for Vortex in a single slide. Um a teaser because I know this this seminar today was or like and last the last one were about query execution. Um a unique thing about vortex is we implement a scan operator that's highly optimized. So it has components of a query engine with lots of types of push

down and then we compile that for execution or well compile is maybe not quite the right word. It's correct for GPUs but not for CPUs um to handle either vector a vectorzed sort of implementation on CPUs or um actual direct centi execution on GPUs. So if that's if you are not tired of the topic and you haven't seen the talk you can go see it or dig around the code base. Um, the other fun thing they say about Vortex, it's outrageously fast. So for random access, it's faster. It's a more

than 100 times faster than perk, but it's even faster than lance, which is specialized for random access. Um, for sort of right speed and scan speed, we're looking at five and 18, 17, 18 times faster than perk. Um, roughly the same size with a lot of variance. And then my favorite fun fact about Cortex for those who care about file formats is that on ClickBench on NVME, it is faster queried from ductb than duct native is. Um, it's also going to be shipped as a core extension in the next DV release, which is kind of a fun

other thing to announce. Um, so yeah, if you're really into file formats and databases and implementing research, hit me up. Um, and as Andy said, you're hiring. Connor who graduated CMU last year is great and is with us and I love CMU students. >> Okay, round of applause. >> Good for one question back. Yes. >> What's the difference between Spire and Vortex? >> The question is >> yeah, Vortex is a file format and it's purely open source. Like a file format

you think of like how do I store bytes on disk? Um, Spiral DB is a hosted database product that is built on top of that file format, but there's a bunch of stuff it does around orchestrating transactions and indexes and query planning. Um, that you know is not included in the open source thing. >> One more question, go for it. What were the biggest changes that you had to do to go from a CPU native right to a GPU native site like a completely separated computer so what's what did you change?

So actually the the main thing was designing um so we a lot of this code actually is pretty classical because it it turned out like I don't know having operators and pipelines are uh I mean not that new I was corrected it's not modeb it's vector- wise but like you know it's been around for 20 years conceptually and I know you just did a lecture the main thing is that for GPUs you really want to have fixed known output size and so um it puts a little bit of extra constraint on how you think

about like what is a pipeline breaker and what do you need to know? Um so we need to know the actual size of the output before executing a given operator. So it that um turns out that constraint and like you know the other constraints sort of lack of data dependencies for example are the same with CPU SIMD um but that one was a little special. So we just had to design the whole like kind of query planning uh apparatus for executing operators around that extra constraint. I mean to his point like everything we

talked about today we talking about last class whether on GPU FPGAAS CPUs whatever comes next the core concepts are the same just you know the hardware implementation is different >> I think that is the main thing is like there are no new ideas under the sun under databases but the hardware changes a lot and that drives you can think of like a database as of you know it's a I always think of the fundamental theorem of linear programming and like simplex algorithm it's like a bunch of the

constraints change because of hardware and it pushes you to a different vertex. Like the answer is the optimum is always in vertex. And so it can be pretty different from stuff that existed before just because hardware shifted. [Music] asset. [Music] Get the fortune. Get the fortune  with the grain. The fortune

