[music] [music] I'm still ass. [music] [music] Let's get started. Round of applause for DJ CASH HERE. YOU HAVE A GOOD WEEKEND? >> YEP. Did you? >> Did you make any money? >> I made a lot of money. >> That's what I Okay, good to hear. Good to hear. All right, guys. Uh for you in the class, lot lot to cover, a lot to lot to go over. Um again, on the the docket for you again, the hopefully everyone's well rested after getting project two uh completed last night. Um

midterm exam again still available. My office hours on Wednesdays. Come take a look. Uh and if you want things regraded, take you take a photo and send it to me. Homework 4 will be due this Sunday coming up on November 2nd. And then project three that came out last week that'll be due uh in November 16th. And the recitation for for that will be tomorrow night at 8:00m on on Zoom and it's been posted on Piaza for this. All right. Any questions about homework four or project three? >> Yes.

>> Which column is? >> The question is what column is the leaderboard graded by? Uh, it should be the one on the far right. The last one. Yeah. If you like it doesn't rank that by default, you click it like twice and it'll rank it. >> Yep. Other questions. All right. And again, if you can't get over databases today after class, we'll have the another seminar speaker. This will be the same guy that came gave a talk in class about single store. I think the that day single store got

acquired by the private equity. So this is post private equity ac acquisition for those guys. Um so he's giving a talk to us at 4:30 after this class. Uh and a week from now we'll have a CMU alumni, distinguished alumni, uh Ryan Johnson who did his PhD here before I came to CMU. Um did his PhD in databases and now he's at data bricks working on Delta Lake. So he'll come talk about uh what Delta Lake does. It's in the same sort of family as the iceberg hoodie or uh hoodie stuff that we talked about so far

in Duck Lake. Um and then next week on Tuesday at the regular data script meeting on on um uh at noon we have somebody from Uber calling in to give a talk about how they they how Uber uses Apache Pino. Okay. All right. So [snorts] last class all last week we were talking about how we are going to build the data systems runtime component the query engine the execution engine to execute queries. In last class in particular, we talked about how we want to design the system to support parallel queries. We talk

about these exchange operators, essentially these ways to coales results from multiple workers running at the same time uh that are working on different parts of a data set or different parts of a query plan at the same time and we put them all together and produce a final result. And so the key thing that we were talking about during this process was that how there was there's this query plan that was being generated. We didn't say how, but if there's this query plan that had these physical operators that were

defining how we were going to access tables, how we going to compute joins and, you know, do any of the other algorithms we talked about so far. And so we've been been very hand wavy throughout the entire semester about okay, how do we get one of these query plans? And so that's what today is all about and for for this week, right? How do we take a SQL query uh from from an application or from some from somebody who wants to run a query and how do we produce that into a query plan that we

can then execute using all the components in our system that we've designed so far and obviously I'm going to focus on SQL because that's the default default language or de facto standard for uh querying tables and relational model that the the same concepts and techniques that I'll be talking about today are applicable for whatever other query language uh you may want to use All right. All right. So again, the high level path of where we're going through now is that we have our application that you know is

written in PHP, Java, ROSS, whatever, it doesn't matter. And they're going to connect to our database system uh and they're going to send us a SQL query. And the first step along this process is that we have to parse the SQL query, right? You know, classic compiler class, uh you know, pick your favorite uh parsing library or tokenizer, whatever. like we'll we'll parse the tokens and we'll generate what's called an abstract syntax tree which is just a a tree duct structure that's going to say things

like there is a scan on on some table that has a name right there's all a bunch of strings that's that's defined in within the SQL query [snorts] so then this abstract syntax tree is passed into a a binder and that's responsible for now resolving all those string identifiers that are in our SQL query like table names column names things like that or function names of course, right? And it's going to consult the catalog that's going to have all this information about what these

different database objects we have in our system. And it's basically going to do this mapping from a name to an internal ID like an object ID. In Postgress, they're called oids. Right. Right. And we have to do this because if someone says select star from table blah and we don't have a table blah, we want to throw an error. Right. And so that's the binder is responsible for doing that. Binders are super complicated because it's it's easy if it's like select star from table foo, right?

That's easy. It's when you start having nested queries and duplicate names or joins on the on on the joining the same table with itself. That's when the binder gets kind of nasty. Uh you know, we could spend a whole semester on this or not, but just assume that something knows how to take string tokens for table name objects or column names and map it to an internal ID. And then that at that point we know like the type or the schema or whatever the thing that they're accessing. And then once we do this binding, now we

have what is called a logical plan. So now we have something that says I want to access table foo and I want to do an aggregation on it. I want to do a sorting on this column. Right? It's a high level definition of what the query wants to do without defining exactly how to do it or how to actually execute it. And then we take that logical plan pass it into our optimizer and this is now responsible for looking at the schema to figure out what are the objects that this thing is trying to access.

Consulting a cost model says all right for these different options that I have to execute this query which one is actually better and this cost model could be fed using statistics that that I've collected in the catalog could have its own magic constants in them uh to define how you know whether scan is faster or spectral scan is faster than the index scan or whatever right there's some the cost model allowed it to judge whether one plan is going to be better than another given a bunch of

alternatives and then voila the opart says okay well I here's you know I crunch on this here's the best physical plan that I could find for this query and then we can then pass that off now to the query engine we just discussed last class to go ahead and schedule this for execution. So today's class we're going to focus on this the optimizer box here. Next class we'll focus on the cost model box up above and obviously it's semiotic. You need one you don't the optimizer doesn't

always need a cost model but a lot of the methods we'll talk about today do uh but you need some way to say this is actually better. You know, ideally you want to be able to say this alternate plan is better than another plan, right? So this is the path we're going on and we're focusing on the optimizer piece and the cost model. Like I said, the binder and parser, it's just a bunch of engineering. It's it's it's painful, especially the binder, but you know, we we can use stuff off the shelf if

necessary. [snorts] All right, so let's look at an example of what we're trying to, you know, look at actually a query and see how we're going to do this. So say we have now a simple query like this. We're doing a join against the employee table with the department table. We're going to find everyone who's in the toy department and we want to get the their the all the unique names. All right. And say that in our data system we also have this catalog that keeps track of all the

different uh tables that I have. What are their primary keys? What indexes do I have? And whether they're clustered or uncclustered on on those keys. And then I'll have some basic information that says I have in the case of the the employee table I have 10,000 tuples or 10,000 records split across a thousand pages and for department there's 500 records split across 50 pages right this is like kind of the bare min well the bare minimum is you have nothing right but that's more the lakehouse data lake

stuff we can ignore that but this is the bare minimum you need you obviously need to know the schema because you need to know what what you if the query says I want to read table employee that what the schema actually is Not always, but for our class here, we assume that's the case. Um, and then we need to know obviously what indexes we have available to us. So, if you just sort of take a almost a little little transcription or or mapping of the SQL query and convert it to relational algebra, you end up with something like

this, right? You have scans on employee and department. Now, I'm going to do a cross join and then everything that I have in either my wear clause, my on clause, right? Those are just filters. And then I have the the projection at the top. Right? So let's say we build a a sort of a naive implementation of a database system. And at the leaf nodes of this query plan, we're going to do uh we're going to do going to read the employee table all 5,000 records. And then we're going to read the the rights

table all uh you know all 500 records. And then what we're going to do is when we do the uh we're just we're just going to scan them in and write them out to like a temp file like something really really basic. And then now once we have all that data prepared we can then do the join. Sorry after we do the cartisian join or cartian product then we now start doing the filtering. So again this is just bottom here we're just matching up all the tuples employees all the pupils of the

department. Then we now we do the filter to start throwing away tubables where that aren't uh where there isn't a match on the department ID and the employee department ID. And same thing now we're going to suck in all the the the the tuples we wrote out in temp table temp file one read those back in and then produce a new temp file two t2 that has the result of this join. We then pass this up to the next filter operator. read all the data in, do the filter, write it all out, and then we end up

with our final projection at the top. We do four reads in, one right out to produce the final result. So for this naive plan, because you know, you never want to do a cross join, right? If we just execute almost again a literal translation of what the SQL query defines for us, right? Map it to relation algebra, we we're doing two million IO's. But we can start doing all the tricks we talked about throughout the entire semester to reduce this, you know, reduce the amount of IO we're doing by just being more uh more

intelligent or more more uh efficient in the operators we're going to choose when we execute this query. So for example, if I get rid of that cross join and now I do an inner join. So as I'm as I'm scanning the table, I can just do the join rather than having to materialize everything out on the cross join. Right? And now I got to start making a decision what my joint algorithm should be. So if I just do like a block nestloop join or page nestloop join, I'm still going to write things out to a temp file. But now

I I'm not writing out the cross productd of all combinations of all tuples from the left and the right side. I'm actually doing the the matching as I'm going along. And then now when I when I in the next phase when I do this additional filter here to throw anybody that's not in the toy department, right, I'm reading less data in and now again writing the same same amount of data out. And so the end projection is still the same. So now we got it down to 54,000 IO's from 2 million,

right? By choosing a better plan. Can we do better? Of course, right? It's all the tricks that that we we we learned throughout the entire semester, right? So if I just take this and I replace the the nested loop join with a sort merge join, right? Assuming I have 50 buffers, I can now write out less data for for this phase. uh and I again reduce the total amount I owed even further. Now we can get it down to uh 7,000. But again in this example here because I'm taking all the results of the scan from this and this

and the join and then writing it out all the tupils out to a file and then once that that file is written then start the next operator to read it all back in. That's the materialization model that we talked about last class which you said is very inefficient if you're reading a lot of data or passing a lot of data from one operator to the next, right? Because there's no pipelining of this. So, if we switch to the vectorzation model, we can get rid of all of these additional writes and reads back in for

these for these temp files and just pipeline all the tupils up and now we get it down to 3,000 IO's. Can we do even better than this? >> Yeah, push down filter. There's one more optimization we can do. remember the joins we said that the you know it matters whether the the largest tables on the on the right hand side or the lefth hand side. So in this case here we can do what he proposed push down the the filter and now swap the order of the employees table and department table right and push push

down the the filter below the join like this right and now the query is is going to be even more efficient. Now we can get it down to just three reads and one right uh because we can do an index lookup on the name. Then we do an index and nestla loop join instead of the sort merge join and now we're only reading you know 37 IO's or doing 37 IO's for this one query. The question is so the question is how do I decide which one to be on the left or the right in this example here because I had index on the department

name you would and you could then do and you know there's only 500 records I mean handwaving how we determine the um the selectivity of this this predicate here that's next class but you would look and say all right well I only have 500 records and there's 100 departments so therefore or you know and and I have some distribution information to say like you know it's not one department has everybody then I know I would want to choose this index right because now I can just do the just go get the you know

the small number of tuples that are coming out of this and then now when I do my join it's it's way more efficient because now it's probing the other side >> what's that question do I need additional IO to go fetch statistics yes I'm ignoring Right. It it'd be typically that that would stay in memory because it's much smaller than the actual data. The way you actually implement that in a like you would actually implement the statistics as just another table. So

yeah, there is IO there's locking and stuff which I haven't talked about that's next week. Like there is additional overhead of going and getting those statistics but like for our purposes here we're ignoring all that. All right. So we can kind of see we did a couple things here. We did a bunch of optimizations where we moved things down. We changed the the physical ordering of of different operations. We changed the order of like whether department employees on the right or left hand side of the join, right? We so

there's a bunch of these tricks here and this is what the optimization is going to do. So anytime you open up like SQL light or duct db or postgquest from your terminal and you write a SQL query in it, it's going to run some some variation of these algorithms we'll talk about today to produce a a physical plan that it actually can execute. Then it runs your query, right? It's doing this in real time as as you know as you hit enter and run run a query for like in case of homework

one. So like it's going to spend you know the query is going to run say for like 10 milliseconds. It'll spend maybe a millisecond for simple queries to run all this optimization stuff then produce a result and it's as a human appears almost instantaneous. For more complex queries it's not instantaneous and you know there's we'll talk about how we decide when to terminate. But this is all going to happen like it when you hit enter or when you set up a query data is going to

do all this and then run the query which to me I find fascinating. All right. So today we're going to talk about the background of query optimization cover a little bit more detail than what we talked about so far. Then we'll spend time talking about how we're going to do transformations or numerations of the different possible query alternatives or query plan alternatives we have for uh for you know for a given query. Then we'll talk about the sort of the two basic categories of

high level categories for query optimization. There's heristics and rulebased where you're applying the transformation rules without a cost model. Uh and then there'll be the costbased search and there'll be two variations of that. So most systems when they most new database systems when they first time they come online they'll build a heristic based rule based optimizer and then later on they'll get more sophisticated either you know as the project grows and becomes more

popular then they'll switch over to a call space one [snorts] right but you need you sort of need the the the rules first to do the call space we'll see why as we go along all right so what are we doing here at a high level so again given a query's logical plan that we get from the binder because it's mapped the names of tables and columns to actual object identifiers in the catalog. The optimizer is responsible for generating a bunch of different alternative plans to execute and those alternatives could be at least

initially could be other logical plans. But in the end, we got to produce a a a physical execution plan that our engine can actually run. Right? So now I don't have to say I want to join table A and table B. I have to know like I'm going to do a hash join on table E A and B or I'm going to do a sort merge on table A and B. But that's the physical plan. I I need to know what that is in order to actually execute anything. And the key thing is that we when whenever we generate these alternate plans, it's

absolutely critical that whatever our plan we generate is equivalent to whatever the original query was or whatever the original logical plan that we were given, right? It doesn't matter that we produce a really fast plan if it produces incorrect results because you know what's the whole point of doing any optimization? Like I might as well just return one or null, right? If no one's going to care. So we'll see as we go along these transformation rules that we'll talk about, you know, they're

going to be set up so that when I change when I, you know, when I permute the plan and start making changes to things, I I need I have to be guaranteed that the the output of that transformation process is is a plan that's still correct. So this would be very complicated to do. It's just picking the right join order. Uh the join the joins for for a for a query plan is shown to be np hard, right? So, so the search space for our our the possible queries that we may have to to deal with is quite large.

Now, most queries aren't joining a lot of tables. Most are joining one table. Sorry, most queries don't have joins. And then the probably the second most common query is have having two joins, but it's a long tail where people do a lot of weird stuff and we we have to be able to handle that. The largest number of joins I've I've I've come across in a in a database is 1500. And this is obviously not a query written by humans. This is something from a dashboard. someone clicking a bunch of buttons to

do a bunch of things. But like you have to do a join on 1500 tables, you know, and and our our solution space is exponential. We have to start making a bunch of decisions how to how to prune prune this down. How to figure out whether one plan is better than another as we look at these alternatives. That'll be the cost model and that we'll cover next week, right? And then an ideal scenario is that no matter how bizarre someone writes a query plan and this especially matters now with or sorry not not a query plan

how no matter how bizarre someone writes a SQL query and this matters now with LLMs because LM are spitting out stuff all the time right no matter how bizarre it actually is no matter what weird things they're doing ideally the optimizer should be able to produce a good plan a good a good optimal plan we'll see some cases where that's that's not always true uh when we open up Postgress and other systems uh for thing for things as humans you think that should be obvious in other cases it's

it's not always all right so I think we've already covered this but logical and physical plan logic plan again it's just describing at a high level what I want my operator to be in a query plan I want to join table A and B I'm not saying how to join it just saying I want to join them and then the physical operators will be a the the actual implementation details of how to actually execute that equivalent logical operator like I want to do a hash joint on a table A and B. I want to sort merge A and B. And as I'm

doing my transformations to convert logical operators to physical operators, it isn't always going to be a one to one mapping. Meaning like a like a logical join operator might not always produce when I do my transformation a single equivalent physical join operator. In some cases, I I'll break it up. In other cases, I I can retract them. And I'm the the data system is free to move things around. the operator is free to move things around if it thinks it's going to make a difference about producing a

better query plan. There's other things we'll care about in a second or maybe end of this lecture like I also need to keep track of like for each operator how what does the data look like that they're producing. Most obvious thing is the sort order. So if I know I need my output to be sorted I want to keep track of like what operator is going to be is is going to be my is going to produce the data in that sorted order because it might be the sort merge join operator. might be the order by

operator or the data might already be sorted or coming from an index, right? So you keep track of some of these physical properties in your query uh optimizer so that when you're doing these transformations, you know that data is coming out in the right form that you would need or that one operator may need. [snorts] It's also worth mentioning too that we're only going to focus on doing query optimization at one query at a time. So we're going to treat every query as if it's, you know, on an island by itself.

We're not worried about other queries running at the same time. We'll get a little bit we can talk a little about that that in the cost model. Uh that's mostly determining you know is one query going to interfere with another and that changes the expected cost of certain operators. But nearly all systems I can't think of anybody outside of research that does this. Yeah, pretty much every system you can think of takes a se one SQL query in and produces one query plan for it. Right. It's not going

to take. You could also take multiple queries in and either figure out how to overlap them so you can run them at the same time or be aware that one query could be producing results that another query could read similar to the scan sharing that stuff that we talked about before. But no, no system actually does this because you don't most people don't write programs that way where you say here's all the queries I'm going to execute ahead of time and in this order. DBT does that which we talked about at

the beginning of the semester where you have sort of a DAG of queries and then you can do this multiquery optimization. But to keep our life simple today and in most systems that are out there, at least all the ones we actually use in production, they're only going to do single query optimization. All right. So now that we have sort of high level understanding of what a career optimizer is doing in the first 20 minutes of class, we want to now go into more details and start talking about how we're actually going to

implement this in our database system. And a optimizer is really comprised of of three components or three three concepts or design decisions. The first is how we're going to do transformations. You're converting logical operators into other logical operators or logical operators into physical operators. And this allows us to enumerate over a bunch of different possibility of a query plan. And then we can have a way to determine whether one plan is going to be better than another. The next piece is going to be the search

algorithm. Like how are we going to look at our possible enumerations and evaluate them and make decisions of what's the next transformation we should apply or what's the next part of the solution space we should examine and how that process runs and how we you know get feedback and and try to refine our decision-m and then the last piece again is the cost model is how we're going to determine whether one query plan is better than another. What's the abs what's the correct cost

of a query plan? I want if I want to know how long it's going to take, what's the easiest or not the easiest, what's the most accurate way to determine how long a query is going to take? Run it, right? But if I just said my solution space is exponential and I have for one query a billion different choices of queries, I could query plans I could use, I can't possibly actually run them because if I ran them and I I get the result and I could just return that back to the to the user. So the the cost model is a way

for allows to approximate guess whether one query plan is going to be better than another. Again, we we'll focus that on how we do that next next class. MongoDB does actually does what what I just said before. They they just run the queries, see what everyone comes back first, and that's the one they keep reusing. It's simple. It's brain dead. It sort of works. Uh but for more complex things, it falls apart. But as I said last in the last class, everyone's query optimizer is really bad. Uh it's just

it's a determining how bad you are relative to other ones. All right. So today's class we're talking about this the first two how we do transformations the enumeration and then what the search algorithms actually look like. So a transformation rule uh is allows us again to convert the the query operator or query plans the operators within them either logical uh sorry they're always going to be logical and then we go go to physical usually don't do transformations from physical to

physical um that complicates things but the idea is that it allows us to take a current state of our query plan and it could be a mixture of logical operators and physical operators all logical operators um and then generate alternatives for that query plan that we think will lead us to a a better result or we think that they're will have um promising solutions for for our search process. [snorts] >> What's that? >> The statement is it's like rewrite rules. Yes. But rewrite rules for the

for the at the plan level >> for uh for the DAG. Yes. For the tree structure for the query plan. Yes. There's we the reason why I was being hesitant is that there are rewrite rules for SQL like at the SQL level like the strings if if I pattern match on like like select star from a view they can then rewrite that into something else that's that would be in my example before that would be be potentially before the binder or after the binder >> you just string matching >> okay

>> it's it's errorrone but like you can do it some some people do that I'm seems a good idea. You could, right? All right. Um, right. So, again, these transformation rules allow us to identify different promising plans and then either they will the the the output is always going to be an alternative plan. And ideally, that plan will have a lower cost or expected cost than the one we started off with or alternatively it may actually be worse. But because we do a certain transformation, it then leads

us or unlocks a bunch of other transformations we could do that those will then have a lower cost. Right? And the key tenant we're going to use to make this all work is rely on relational algebra equivalencies where we can be assured that if we convert a certain set of operators in our query plan to another set of operators because of the the the rules of relational algebra, we know that the the plans will be equivalent and correct. [snorts] And this just repeating what I said. So again we can rely on the fact that

because relational algebra is well defined uh more so than SQL relation algebra is well defined. We would know the rules in which we can change things and permute the the those relational algebra operators to produce other operators that we know are are equivalent to each other. Right? So if you just go look at examples like selections, right? So I know that if I have a like a a a select operator with a predicate P1, P2, P3 up to PN that I in in this case here it's conjunction. I know I can I can decompose or break up

that conjunctive clauses into separate predicates and have now separate select operators or filter operators for each of those individually. So instead of having uh you for scanning relation R and applying P1 NP2 NP3 and P4 all at the same time, I can break it up into different select oper or filter operators and then now I can move them around in uh independently from each other and I know I'm still going to produce the the same correct result. Or I may want to do P2 first, apply P2 first before P1 because P2 is cheaper to

run and it's more selective. And again because of the rational object rules I can move those things around and I still produce the same uh semantically logical result. [snorts] >> What's that? >> The question is would you ever want to combine them again? Sure. Why not? Yes. >> The question is is the select operator commutive with all other operators? Uh everything but outer joins. We're not going to cover outer joins. Outer joints are tricky because of null semantics. But for for this lecture,

yes. [snorts] The question again like the question is is this select operator commutive? And my answer is yes except for outer joins because because of the nulls, right? Like do you match if there's no match on one side versus another? What produces the null? But let's ignore that. Okay, [snorts] that's why I'm saying like there's no there's no outer join in in in relation to algebra. There is in SQL. That's why the semantics are trickier. SQL has been extended for that but all right so all

right there other authorizations we can do like this is similar to what we talked about I think two classes ago of like hey here's this expression tree we can apply sort of compiler tricks to try to optimize things further right so here I have x= 3 and y= x well I know because of commutitivity that or sensitivity that I sorry transitivity that I can take the x= 3 and replace the yals x to be yals three because I know x equals 3 when I was doing the comparison. And it seems like a trivial thing, but that's

actually going to be way faster now to do my evaluation when I'm actually running through through real data because now I'm just comparing, you know, with a value that can sit in a register rather than a reference to another variable. You can do other optimizations ahead of time, too, like x= 1 plus 1. The optimizer can say, well, I know 1 plus 1 is going to produce a constant, so let me just evaluate that now and produce two and then substitute that. So I'm not doing PL oneplus one over and over

again. And this last one a bit more nuance, but it basically says like it's similar to the the constant propagation stuff we covered last time where instead of me running this year function to get the year out for every single tupole I may be looking at, if I have a billion tupils, then I'm better off just applying the function once and then reusing the result over and over again. Uh for joins again ignoring uh outer joins, but for case inner joins equins uh they are commutive. So I can swap the

order like R joint S that's equivalent to S joint R. Likewise if I have R joint S followed by joint T, I can move all those things around and I still produce the same result. And as we talked as we when we talked about joints, we said that depending on the join algorithm implementation, the physical operator we're going to use in our query plan to do the join, I may want to have the larger table be the out the outer table versus the inner table. So that's why if I have statistics to determine which one

is actually the larger one, I can look at the I can move things around and I know I'm guaranteed to still produce the same result because of those uh cumitivity and sensitivity rules. Cartisian mark same thing. Yes. In general, you never want to do a cross product though unless unless unless unless the query explicitly says do a cross join, never do it. Yeah. But that's that's an easy one. All right. So again, just to show you how how challenging this is, the number of join orders you have in an Nway

binary join. Again, binary means I'm just I can only join two tables at a time is mean this massive number here, right? Just showing you this like there's so many different choices we we we have to consider. And if we just try to blindly look at everything uh all possible combinations as we sort of permute the search tree, you know, it would it would take would be exhaustive would just be way too slow. So a bunch of these transformation rules are going to allow us to throw things away that we don't

want to consider like like a cross join for example uh and I don't have to bother even considering them. And when we talk about IBM systemr R they're going to throw away uh a bunch of one two different types of join tree structures because then that cuts down the search base even though that may should be the true optimal plan just in the sake of actually producing a result they would need actually can run in in reasonable time they don't even bother considering them. [snorts] All right. So what are kind of

transformations we can do? Well, a bunch of these we've already talked about and I'll just go through an example one by one. And all these here we can do this at the logical level. Um because we don't have to define exactly what al what join algorithm we're going to use. We just know that these rules should get applied because we as database people that built the system, we know that these are things you're always going to do. So we don't have to ask a cost model, hey, is this

going to be maybe better or not? These are things you always want to apply. So the first one was the example that we saw at the beginning. I want to split my conjunctive clauses. So again, if I take a literal translation of the seagull query trying to find all the people that are all the artists appear on the tribute album for DJ Mushu, then I would have these bunch of cross joins because that's a naive implementation that produced comes out of the binder and then I have my single uh filter clause

filter operator that has all the conductor clauses inside of them. So if I just take this guy here, just split it up on the ends, which is easy to do because I'm traversing the tree structure. Then I'm going to produce a bunch of different or now a sequence of three filter operators that each going to do one of those predicates by themselves. Now, now I can do the predicate push down trick we saw before. And see this is why you want to break this up because now they're they're independent of each

other. I can move them individually based on uh you know what I see below me in in the query plan. So this top predicate here, artist ID equals appears and artist ID, I could put that right above the the cross productd join between artist and appears. And likewise the the album name equals mushu tribute. I put that right above the the scan on on album, right? And I get a query plan that looks like this. Then the obvious thing I want to do is apply a transformation rule that says well if I see a cartisian product with a

predicate right above it that has the join clause I can convert that into an inner join right and I just you traverse down the tree and apply those changes [snorts] this one depends on what your ex the execution environment is depends on what the query processing model you're using depends on what the data actually looks like you can also do a projection push down so I can have a projection top artist.name. That's the only thing I I need in my output. But depending on how big wide these tables are, I may want to

push down projections before I even do the join because I I can throw away a bunch of columns that I don't need and don't need to propagate up into to the query plan. So you end up something like this. So all these transformations, again just reiterate, all these transformations I just did here are doing logical to logical transformations. And I don't need a cost model to determine whether it's a the right thing to do. We as database people we people that understand how the system is actually

going to be implemented can define rules to say this is something I always want to do. If again if you don't remember anything else with this course other than use never use MAP in your database like you should never do a cross join unless somebody asks you to do it. So an easy logical oper uh logical transformation rule is say replace any cross joins or cross productds with with a uh inner join if you can. So the the number of these transformation rules your system will have will depend on the sophistication

of the system itself and the optimizer. I think Microsoft publicly talks about I think they have about 480 500 different transformation rules right uh and that's they probably want they have one of the world's best query optimizer so that's probably the upper limit of how many would actually exist although I will say they are discovering new ones that didn't exist before using AI. Uh so that's kind of cool and that paper's coming out. Uh it's been announced uh and it's the one I talk about when I get

came back from Microsoft I was really excited about. That one should be coming out pretty soon. But they're they're doing using LMS to find query you know transformation rules they didn't think about before. It turns out a lot of them they're actually correct. [snorts] So I would say also too in my my example here all these transformation rules are doing one to one mapping like I'm doing like I went from well in this case here I it's less than one like I took a filter operator and a cross join and

then I converted that to a single joint operator. So I went from two logical operators to one one logical operator. In other cases it may go in the other direction. Right? In this case here I had uh one projection operator then it then converted it to a bunch more projection operators. Um and in this example here I'm kind of going a one-way street my transformations like I'm saying going back here I'm saying I know I want to do this get rid of this cross join. So let me go and generate the an

alternative that uses the inner join. And then you don't actually care about the the the where you came from. So I don't need to keep track of the history of what was the query plan before I did that transformation rule. In other transformation rules, you do actually want to keep around the old ones. And we'll see how we handle that in a second because you may you may decide you're going down a path in your sort of search tree that doesn't actually help you and you and you want to backtrack and go

back go back. Yes, >> the statement is uh in this in this example here I'm doing artisan appears first is that just incidental in the PowerPoint demonstration yes uh you would need a cost model to determine whether one's bigger than another which you know which one you want to join first we'll talk about that in a sec so in some database systems like Oracle famously in the 80s However you defined it in your in your in your from clause like if you look at this it says from artist appears album

and at the bottom I have artist appears and album I'm joining in that order. That's how they would decide join ordering and they called this a semantic optimizer because it's you as the human wrote your query this way. Therefore you knew you knew the order you wanted to join things. It's all it's not real right like people don't know what the hell they're doing. So uh but that's what that's what Larry has say how great his optimizing was because allowed to maintain the semantic meaning of what

you wrote in your application. It's all I'll show a quote in a second. All right. So yes >> I'm just curious what is there >> his question is is there a way to hint to to give hints to the quer to the data system the query app and say I do want things join order this way. Yes. So not all J systems support hints like Postgress by default does not. There's an there's a extension called PG plan PG plan hint plan or plan hint one of the two where you basically put comments in

in the front of the SQL query and say join A then followed by B or GB to A and you can actually do things like I want to do a hash join I make sure you use this index right my SQL can do this and some things Oracle can do this SQL server I think you have to dump the whole query out and put it back and put hints in but yeah you can override the optimizer decision where you where you find it just making stupid choices and you say you're dumb do it this way But you have to know what you're doing.

>> Do you think there's value? >> Is the question is do I think there's value in hinting? Yes. Because I'd be naive to saying well like so the Postgress the Postgress engineering philosophy is that you should not have hints. The optimizer should be just improved. Make sure you don't ever have to write hints. We we can look at some examples in a second where they they just get it wrong and you do want hints. Um the challenge of hints though it kind of goes back to I think maybe the first or

second lecture when I talked about like this kodil thing where if you if you didn't write your queries in a declarative language you would say I want to do the join order this way and I want to make sure I use this algorithm. You sort of hand coding what the joint algorithm actually going to be and you would you would you're essentially locking in the query plan based on what you see the data at that time. So now if the the data distribution changes and now you want to flip the joint order or

flip what algorithm you're using, you got to go back and rewrite your application. So hints kind of give you that problem as well. Basically locking in what you exactly you want the query plan to be. And maybe that that's okay, but if if the assumptions you make when you define those query plans change, the data evolves in some way or the guy that wrote the hints quits and then you're now responsible for maintaining this codebase from 10 years ago and you're like what are all these hints and the

and the and the assumptions are all wrong. it's going to produce bad query plans. So like a double-edged sword like yes in some cases they're a good idea in other cases you know maybe not. All right. So the again the search alg the search search engine in our query optimizer is responsible for applying with these these transformation rules generating different alternatives either either logical alternatives or physical alternatives and then using a cost model to determine uh whether one plan is

better than another. But it may not be the case that you always apply a cost model. And maybe it's be the search engine just says, "I'm out of rules for me to run or I run out of time." Then it just stops, right? The challenge is going to be that we may not always have all the information we need to produce the best optimal plan. So remember we talked about prepared statements where you can basically say here's a SQL query I want to run in the future. Give it a name like a macro and

then now I can execute it by passing in like input parameters to like an RPC or a function call. when you call up a pair some most data systems will generate a physical plan for you so that when you then invoke that query it doesn't have to run through the optimizer it has has a query plan ready to go of course the challenge is if I have input parameters that I don't know at the time I'm doing planning how do I pick the best optimal plan and so the easiest thing is take take an average of the values well that assumes

you have statistics or could take a good average so we we we may deal be dealing with in incomplete information especially with statistics we may not have anything. We we'll we'll see how we can handle that uh next class. [snorts] All right. So, as I said, there's basically two approaches to this. There's just applying all the rules that we talked about so far and just you keep applying them until you you realize you're stuck in an infinite loop or you've run out some whatever your budget

is for running or there's no more transformations actually to apply. And as I said, this is what most people build when they build a data system that will support SQL. This is the very first thing that that they're they're going to end up implementing. And then a more sophisticated approach uh is to use call space search. I'm saying sophisticated like this is actually what IBM built back in the 70s. So the very first relational data system came with its own call spacebased query optimizer. Uh but

still people implement the first one because that's it's just easier to do. So we'll first talk about this one understand what it is and then we'll see how we can do you still need to do the heristics some cases to help us guide in our in our costbased search. All right. So a here's the basic query optimizer. It's defining the static rules that that are going to transform to logic operators and physical operators again without a cost model. And these decisions can be based on

things like oh you're doing a a wear clause on a with a quality predicate on a primary key. Well I know I have a primary key index. Therefore the access method should the physical operator for your for your scan for reading that table should just be looking up on that primary key index. Right? Right? It could be sort of simple things like that where all that projection predicate uh push down we talked about before limit push down if you can and then some really basic simple rules for uh for

determining whether you know what should be the join order could be the naive thing like just assume whatever the SQL query gives you that's the joint order people wanted or again whether or not this is the cost model it's sort of semantics to say all right I'll just go look to see how many tupless I expect to be in in this table and then that'll determine the joint So this is what ingress built uh in the 1970s their first query optimizer. Uh ingress again was the precursor to Postgress.

Oracle had this also in the 1970s up until early 90s. They went pretty far with this. This is what MongoDB essentially does now. And again, every new data system written in the last 10 years when they first start off the unless they're using bits and pieces of Postgress or a query optimizer package called Calite. Um, this is what per everyone else does. And the reason is because it's pretty simple to implement. It's really easy to debug because you just take the SQL query and set trace

through the debugger and see all the transformation rules that get applied uh and see see what comes along. The problem is going to be though it's going to rely on magic constants or hard-coded intuition about whether one decision is better than another. And for simple things like predicate push down, that's okay. For more complex queries, uh this this becomes problematic. And if I have to do a lot of joins, you're never going to get an optimal plan just because you can't reason about

all the different independencies and and what the data looks like and understand how things get get propagated up in query plans. So optimization get you get you for simple things like simple applications where there are no joins but once you start doing more than two two tables in a in a query sorry two joining two more than two tables in a query this falls apart. Yes. magic constant. >> So the qu question is what do I mean magic constant? So do I have slides on this? Let me think. No, it's not here.

So um a magic constant would be how do I determine whether an index scan is better than a sequential scan. So if it's like simple things like where ID equals 1 2 3 and ID is the primary key, then yeah, the index scan is going to make sense. But now if I start doing range predicates scans and my choice is either do a sequential scan or an index scan I kind of need to know like what the distri distribution of the data looks like. What's the cost of accessing the index versus scanning the table?

Right now you're basically starting to build a cost model. So a lot of times in systems they'll say well a sequester scan is some multiple faster than an you know a a random IO. So now you how do you how do you set those knobs correctly? Depends on the hardware depends on depends on what the data is. Now the cost model stuff next class will have the same problem too. But this this is even more problematic in in in if you just pure heristics. Ideally also too you want to define your transformation

rules in not necessarily DSL but in a structured manner so that you can compose them together real quickly. In Postgress it's bunch of if and else that's that's the rules. The question is why don't they write a DSL for that? It's hard. >> I I mean let me tell you, right? And they know their optimizer sucks, but like it's hard. Yeah. Yeah. In the back. >> The question is, is there only one parameter we want to optimize as a cost model? We'll cover that next class. No,

but IO usually is is the the big one. But IO could be network IO, dis IO, right? And disk and network is getting really fast. CPU is probably bottleneck. So that matters too. Now, The question is how when I say we're trying to produce a good plan, what do I mean by good? Depends. Most data systems will optimize for performance, right? And and how you know how do you as a human perceive performance is wall clock time. But it's very hard to be able to to come up with a cost model that says these amount of

IO's are going to take this many milliseconds and therefore I have to have this many and that's going to calculate the wall clock time. So instead they use a they use you know a synthetic values again we'll cover that more in the next class but like and and most systems are going to say I care about the performance of of the query other systems say may care about the cost of actually running the query in the cloud environment but that's not not that not that common but you could do it because

it's another it's another objective you just optimize for them. All right. So, this is the snippet from the unofficial Larry Ellison uh autobiography. Uh and in in one of these pages here, it's Stonebreaker, the guy invented Postgress and Ingress. They interview him and he starts talking about how uh again Oracle's queer optimizer in the 80 was in the 80s was total crap. But then he called them instead of saying you know instead of making his weakness be the thing that the marketing people and

another and his competitors could take advantage of he would then claim that they had this beautiful semantic optimizer that just generated the joiner based on the order in which the tables appeared in the query and as I said like nobody it's a stupid thing you wouldn't actually want to build an operator this way but they were able to sell that to people because it was the 80s right all right so that's heristic and rules again these are I would say also say these are not uh mutually exclusive. So

you could build a costbased search that still applies to all the transformation rules that we talked about so far and you could do a first pass of doing that logical transformation stuff that I talked about at the beginning and then you hand off the the final remaining decisions to a costbased optimizer but it depends on how you implement stuff. All right. So again with a costbased search going apply the transformation rules that that we've defined before going enumerate a bunch of different choices we would have uh

and at every step of the way at least when we're doing the costbased search we would consult the cost model and say is this new plan we're generating after you apply this rule is this better than the best I've seen so far if no then based on how I'm searching things I may actually want to stop searching that sort of that branch in my my solution case or I may be allowed to override that that uh initial increase in the in the cost. Think of like a gradient descent search like I'm allowed

to to ignore that I'm bumping back up because I know if I get once I get on the other side of that hill then I'll get down to uh something that looks like the local true optimal. So you would typically do this on uh well you could do this in a bunch different phases depending what your query looks like. like you could handle all the sort of subplans that are tackling one one table at a time, one relation at a time. Then you expand out and say I want to handle all the joins. Then you expand

out even further and say I want to handle all the nested queries. Some systems do this in in sort of stages. Other systems do this in in sort of a all at once holistic uh tuning approach or sorry optimization approach. Again, we'll see the two examples of this. [snorts] So when do we decide to stop? Right? The most obvious thing is you just set a timer and say, well, when my query optimizer is run for, I don't know, 500 milliseconds, right? Or some whatever you want to set the threshold

to be. Once I run to that time, then I stop and I produce whatever the best query plan I've seen so far. That's what I'm going to execute with. Another could be if you if you have a way to define the the threshold and say, I don't want don't give me back any query. Don't stop searching till you find a query plan that has this lower call. So, it could could be like I'm replanning the query I've seen before. I don't want to let it go until I see, you know, stop once I see a query that's 10%

better than a query plan that's 10% better than I've seen before. [snorts] Or at some point if if you sort of plateau, you're not seeing any any better plan over a period of time, then then you can drop out as well. If the query is simple or and your system's really fast and you don't have a lot of rules to apply, you may end up just exhausting all the possible combinations and then you don't have to wait for the timeout or or the cost threshold. you just come back say I know this is the

optimal plan like select star from fu that's pretty instantaneous right you don't have to do a lot of rules to figure out what you don't have to look at a lot of bunch of alternatives you can you can spit out something very quickly [snorts] the way to actually really do this is actually not on wall clock time or all these other things um it's actually going to be number three is obvious you always want to do number three but like for this last one here instead of trying to count how long I've run in SQL server

what they do is they count how many transformation rules they've applied and then when you exhaust the number of these number of transformation rules then it kicks out and and terminates the search. Anybody take a guess why they do this instead of walk time as you're guaranteed to get at least what >> they say it is you're you're guaranteed to at least get one transformation considered. Yeah, you would set the treasure count to like I don't know hundreds of thousand. >> Yes. Bingo. They they said that

different hardware may have different wall clock time or actually same hardware but now the the system is being overloaded because a lot of queries are running and if I set it to the wall clock time and my CPU is taxed out if I you know one second when my CPU has is overutilized I may not apply as many rules versus like one second when it's you know underutilized and I can use the core to its fullest uh capabilities. So this guarantees that no matter how stressed out the system actually is you're always guaranteed to produce the

same plan for the same query given the same you know same same input constraints right so my SQL and SQL server they do the first one right because in case of or sorry Postgress and my SQL do the first one case of Postgress there is no concept of transformation rules that applies and can start counting them because it just has a bunch of if then else statements that it always runs through and the way SQL server does does it and that'll be the the top down search we'll see in a and they they're

they know all the they as they go along they're sort of incrementally applying rules and they just keep count of of how many they've applied. If they exhaust it, you at least need to get to the bottom of the search tree so you have at least one query plan uh that you can actually then run. Um but you know it's at least no matter whether you you're again you're running on a machine that's fully utilized or underutilized you you'll always produce the same query plan. All right. All right. So, the first

thing we want to do is figure out, you know, one of the things we have to do is apply transformation to rules to figure out how we're actually going to access the data on our underlying tables, right? And this could be through a combination of things we'll see next class, but like well, we want to look at all the different choices that we have for our accessing our table. And a transformation rule can convert things like you know scan get table fu or scan table fu however you want to define it

and it can convert that into a physical operator that either does a sequential scan or an index scan or a multi-index scan that we talked about last time right so it look at the catalog look at these statistical information and it can say here's here's all the choices I have for this for this accessing this data and then applies transformation rules to convert that logical scan operator into the different physical operators. And this is essentially repeating what I've already said like again we look at

all the things we have the way to access data and we just try out different combinations of them based on what our rules are allowed to do. In the end of the day if we have no index we could use because it's you know the predicates don't match on it or the the you know it's a it's a hash index and we want to do a less than or greater than. the end of the day, no matter what, we could always convert a a logical scan operator on table into a physical sequential scan. Like that's the fallback choice

and it could be the slowest, but it's something we we can always rely on. [snorts] For simple queries, uh there what is known as called sarable. This is a database term. It just means search argument able. It comes from the 80s. Um, and basically this says is like I can have a transformation rule that that looks at my scan operator, looks at my predicate and just then looks in the catalog and says, you know, here's an index that I could use for this uh for this predicate here. And I just convert

the the logical scan operator into a physical operator on that index. And it seems kind of obvious that like you know you could always just do this always just look at like oh I definitely need to access this data and I need to uh or I want to be sorted on whatever this column is but a lot of these systems choke up on this or I may decide even though I have the index uh in in a call space transformation that I don't actually even want to apply it because it's it's just better because it's to do

a central scan. So let's do a quick demo of that. All right, let me log in. [snorts] So I pre-populated some some data in Postgress. I think it's 10 million uh 10 million rows which is a bunch of random random information right uh do limit one right there's a primary key called ID and then a value just it's a random random integer and I think I have um I probably think 10 million yeah okay so I've created an index on on the value column, right? So when you in the bottom here, I

created a B+3 index. You always have one in the primary key, but I also created a B+ 3 index on the value column. [snorts] So without running the queries again, we can put the we can put the explain uh keyword in front of our query and this will give us the query plan here. Right? So here I'm doing a select star select ID from the xxx table where value is greater than equal to 1 2 3 and value is less than 456 and then in this case here post decides that yes I want to use the index on the value column and it go and

and you know instead of doing a sequential scan [snorts] likewise if I do a lookup like this I want to do a uh select from the table order by the the value column and give me the the top the top top 20 values, right? In this case here, Postgress recognizes I again I have a an index on the the value column and I the data is going to be sorted the way I want. So it's it's allowed to go ahead and use that. See if it finds me. No, didn't find me. Okay, but Postgress is optimizer is dumb.

Let's look at this query. What am I doing? Same query as above. give me the top 20 values. But in my order by clause, I put value plus zero. Value is an integer column. That means you add zero to it. It's the same value, right? Well, I've already told you what's going to happen. I say let's vote see what Postgress whether Postgress picks the index or not. But I already told you it's stupid and it doesn't, right? So this seems as humans you look at this say well clearly plus zero I can

just drop that because I know it's an integer right I think I and if I go back correctly I I made the column I didn't make it not null maybe that's that's why right but it could look at it statistics and recognize that I don't have any null values right in its cost model but it can't do that right so if Let's see. I doubt it'll even do that. So, if I drop the table, this should go fast. Um, I add it back. And here now, I'm going to say the value is not null. And let me

go generate some um this query here is the insert into that just generates generate series makes a bunch of values. And I'm going to insert that into into the table. It only takes a few seconds. um [snorts] in theory. There it goes. All right. So now and let me add now the index on on that column. Should take a few seconds. And now I go on the same there's the first query without the plus zero and it's able to figure out that I should use the index. In this case here, even though it's not

null, it can't use the index. Now, we'll talk about analyze next class, but that's basically a way for it to collect statistics about the the the um the table. In this case here, it has all the it needs and it still can't pick the index. >> Yes. >> The question is why does it why does it think the question has a lower cost than what? Sorry. So let's see. >> So here's here's the first one >> and here's the second one. Right. So you're saying for what? Which

one? >> Which one? So which one? The for which operator? So each each operator has its own cost. Right. >> Why is one in the top smaller than this one? >> Yeah. >> Because this is a special this is reading all the data. Yeah, like what I'm saying like the query is order by value plus zero. As a human, you know any integer plus zero is the same in same value. So that plus zero means nothing. Postgress sees that says oh I can't do this because this can't match.

It's trying to do like a string match on the the name of the column and if it sees any expression like a plus zero, it knows to it it it uh it just it doesn't pick the index >> case like no matter how many plus the statement is no matter how many uh no matter what like plus zero times one right like plus a thousand should should just always use the index >> doesn't >> but like [snorts] >> uh the same is if I need to uh if I if I want to do an an expression in my Like

like do it in a principal way. >> Yes. Yes. Do it in a principal way. Yes. They're not. >> Yeah. >> Because the optimizer says up I can't it's not an exact match. I can't do it. >> Uh it's the same as partial evaluation is hard. Uh why >> not many what >> database compilers or compiler compiler? >> I mean datavis could do it. So, I I don't have SQL Server running, but like SQL Server handles this no problem, but that's like SQL Server.

>> I I I I wish I could get it working. I don't have it working. Uh um yeah, I I was rushing this. going to work. But let me try um let's try duct DB overflow. >> Statement is plus one might overflow. Yes. >> But if if you have statist statical information about your queries or so your data, you can say no value is greater than whatever the upper limit or even close to it. So therefore it's safe for me to do it. Now your statistics might be wrong. And therefore you're very conservative

about it. Yes. But you don't need that for uh like you could still do the order by and and again again because you know like if you if it's just like plus something right like the how does this actually I I don't know what they would do if for the I don't know I actually don't know how they would handle the overflow if you do the projection after the fact. uh cuz it's still technically the largest but it's still would you might it might throw an error I don't know

you get into like semantics of SQL like does it round or not round right and that's >> I rounding gets weird um >> now we're now we're getting into a rabbit hole uh hold up so I have four like Say I have 4.5. Say 4.2. Right? >> If I cast that to an int, what number should I get? >> Four. >> Who says raise your hand and say four? Raise your hand. You say say five. Raise your hand. Say throw an error. There's an error. Right. So what if I do that? Doesn't like that. What about this?

Takes four. All right, let's try DTB. All right, so select 4.2 cast in it. All right, raise your hand if you say an error. Raise your hand to say four. Raise your hand to say five. Four. All right, let's try 4.8. Raise your hand. Clearly not an error. Say raise your hand to say four. Raise your hand and say five. Five. Right. But we just we just did this in Postgress and showed an error. Right. Uh Firebolt might work too because it I think it uses the Postgress parser. Um I I don't think this is going to work.

4.2. No, it doesn't doesn't like that. that dot that colon dot colon colon and then the the um the uh and then what the type is that's a that's a that's a it's a postress idium that duckb picked up um >> uh in postgress so select oh you're 4.2 cast 4.2 do as integer. Uh, what am I doing wrong? [clears throat] No, no, you got to do like that. >> So, it can't cast. And I forget. Is this the one that went signed? It might be my SQL. It restarted. Sorry. Um, all right.

I forgot the point of this. Uh, actually, I want to show something duct real quick. So, duct DB, I've created the same table. Um, and I can run the same queries as before. Right? [snorts] And even though I had an index uh on this table, uh it decides it to still do a sequential scan. Right? Now, if I do this, the one we query we had before again, give me the top 20 uh values after ordering by who says it's going to use the index? Raise your hand. Very few. Who says it's going to do a special scan?

I tricked you. They're all wrong. It's going to do two sequential scans. All right, that's kind of hard to see. Um, I'll just scroll up. So, what is it doing? So, it's doing a sequential scan uh once on the on the side here. uh so on the one side and that's and it's the then it's going to get the top end values of that and then it builds a hash join and then then scans the table again and joins it with the self and trying finds all the matches and again according to to ductb's cost

model this says it's just it's just faster to do that so no matter what I put here I put a plus zero right it's still going to pick the same thing and if I actually run it as we saw before although this is parallel queries like it can rip through this in what is that 0.01 uh 10 milliseconds uh whereas Postgress will take you know almost a second. [snorts] Okay >> that this was central scan if I give it get rid of this. All right still slower. Yeah. >> Statement is I'm comparing between

column store and rotor. Yeah. I didn't say it was a fair comparison. I'm just saying that like >> uh statement is what if I force I don't know if they querance I forget. I think it might I don't I know how to do it in postgress and other things. All right. Sorry. That was that was I love demos. I love SQL. All right. Let's see if we get this to work again. um or not, whatever. If it finds me, it finds me. Whatever. All right. Cool. Um all right. The thing I want to get into again

that's important is understand is there's for a call space. >> Let's screw that one in the end. The question is which one's the least worst one? The Germans have the best one. Umbra uh duct DB copied what Umbra did, but actually they didn't copy from Umbra. They copied from the first German system, Hyper. The Umbra one has a bunch of other stuff and they write about in papers that blows duct out of the water, but that one's not open source and it's commercialized to Cedarb.

Umbra has the best bottom up one. SQL server has the best top down one. The theory I think shows the bottom one is actually better than top down. top down has other advantages that we'll cover along. All right. So, all right. There's two ways to implement your C optimizer. When you do these these search and when you start looking at multiple relations, you're going bottom up or top down. So, in bottoms up, the idea is that you start with nothing. You have nothing in your in your query plan. You just have like what

the leaves of the the query plan are and then you build it up incrementally to get to the final outcome that you want. In a top- down optimizer, you start with the final result that you want. like I want to produce the join of this this and this whatever sort of I whatever whatever you know whatever is in my query plan or my my in my query and then I traverse down search down the the query plan adding the operators I need to get me to that result until I I reach the leaf nodes and again me sitting with

my hands making little finger gesture doesn't mean anything so let's look at examples see see what I'm talking about for now for all these examples we're going to have two distinctions between our operators and our query plan we'll have the light gray one to be logical operators and then the The darker ones be the physical operators, right? So bottoms up, we start with uh the the bottom of this delete nodes. I want to I want to scan artists. I want to scan appears. And then eventually I

want to get into the artist appears uh join output. So what I would do is I start start from the bottom and I look at apply my transformation rules and say here's all the choices I would have as I go up the query plan until I reach my final destination. And whatever path to that final destination at the top has the lowest cost. That's my optimal plan. And I choose that. In top down or backward chaining, you start at the very top here and you say, well, what do I need to do to get down to the to the

leaf nodes? So, first thing I have my my artist appears. I try apply this first choice and because now I need to at least get to the leaf nodes once so I can at least have some query plan. I would do basic basically a depth first search going down one side of the query plan. get down to this leaf node, look at all my possible choices, get down and then come back up and look at down this path and look at all my possible choices and then I end up with the the the final result for my query. [snorts]

Okay, let me go through more details of these. This is this is a high level the two distinctions that we're going to have in our implementations, right? And if you're coming from the sort of sort of classical optimization world, it's backward chaining versus forward chaining. All right, let me skip this. This is basically saying that if there are p there's patterns you can recognize in your query where you know that it's it's if a query of a certain category like when we talked about snowflake schemas

and star schemas if you know it's going to be like I have a single fact table and a bunch of dimension tables then you you don't even bother doing a full search you just sort of you bootstrap it with the a plan structure they think is close to the optimal and you start your search from there again ra ra ra ra ra ra ra ra ra ra ra ra ra ra ra ra ra ra ra ra rather from starting from scratch. >> [snorts] >> All right, so bottom optimization, we're going to do a bunch of static rules that

we had beginning to do this initial optimization, and then we're going to use dynamic programming, uh, which I realized I shouldn't rush through in the last six minutes, but let me get through the bottoms up, and we'll come back to top down next class. All right, so you're going to do dynamic programming, which is divide and conquer. Start looking at the different choices you have going up to the query plan, and you work your way up into the top. the very first bottoms up query optimizer. The

first call costbased query optimizer ever was IBM's system R. And basically what they do is they would break up the query plan into these blocks like sort of sub plans and they would optimize them and they would sort of stitch the blocks back together to produce the the final result that they would want. Because it was the 1970s, computer hardware was very limited and not a lot of memory and and you know single core very weak CPUs. they had to do a bunch of uh simple optimizations to throw away

results to reduce the search base to make the problem more tractable. So one of the assign decisions they made is that they would only consider left deep trees and they would never look at right deep trees or bushy trees. So left deep tree basically says I'm going to join two tables A and B and whatever the output of that is I'm going to join with the next table and whatever the output of that I join with the next table. Right? Sort of it's all it's left deep because it's going up on on one side of

the query plan rather than have this example we had before. I could join A and B and then join C and D and then take the output of those two joins and then join them together. So system R is not going to do any of that. Some systems I think Postgress still does does this today like they won't support bushy joins as an optimizer again just just to reduce the the search search space. [snorts] All right. So the way it work is you you first look at all your your your the leaf notes and your query plan all your

access methods and you apply simple heristics to say which are the best choices based on what I have in my catalog. Then you're going to apply transformation rules to enumerate all possible joint arguments you would have for your table and then you then you figure out which one is going to be have the lowest cost. This diagram doesn't mean anything. So let's look at at the tree structure. So again I start at the beginning. I would figure out all the different ways I could I could access t

these three tables artist album appears. And then once I have that now I want to figure out what's the join order I want to use. What path I want to get up to my final outcome where I join artist appears and album. So in the first level of the tree search I would look at all possible combinations of joining these three three different tables here right so I could do a and now I'm looking at the physical operator so I could join hash hash join on artist and appears merge sort merge join on artisan appears

right and so forth and this obviously this doesn't fit in powerpoint so imagine it's all possible combinations going here on the other side then I invoke the cost model and say okay these different physical operators that I have which one going which which path going up to the next logical operators in my in my in the tree. Which one each of those have the lowest cost? And I'm going to throw away the ones that that don't have the highest cost, right? Highest or best cost and lowest cost

dependent you're trying to minimize or act maximize for. And then I do the same thing again. I look at all possible join orders for the the next two tables in in the query plan. Right? So taking the output of artist appears and I want to join with album. So I look at the hash joint, look at the merge joint, I can look at an S loop joint if I wanted and have more space in PowerPoint. I look at all those possible combinations and then same thing I pick for each path which whatever one has the lowest cost. Then I

look now for all the paths from the from the bottom the the starting point to the top which path has the the global uh lowest cost and that's the one I want to end up with at the end. Right? It's just dynamic programing. means you're dividing up by looking at one level at a time rather looking at all possible join orderings at at the same time. Of course, the challenge in this implementation is that they had no notion of of the physical properties of the data. So they had no notion of a

sort order. So if my query had an order by clause uh and in this case here they couldn't account for that in in their implementation and hash joins make all the data random anyway. So the way they way to make this work is they would embed in the um in the cost model itself. They would say, "Oh, well after I figure out the the the path I want to go through, which one is, you know, I I would I would give a penalty to any query plan that doesn't have the data sorted in the way that I want it versus

the ones that do have sorted the data that I wanted." Okay. Yes. that >> his question is is this guaranteed be optimal? No. Of course. No. >> Yeah. Can't. Yes. >> The question is the statement is and they're correct. This is quadratic cost if you only consider left deep trees. Yes. And so if you throw away bushy plans and right deep trees, it reduces quite significantly. But it's still quadratic. Then it's that large number that that your cataly number. Yes, I was talking

about board. Yes. And that's massive. Okay, let's stop here again. This was rushed so I apologize. We'll pick up on this on Wednesday. We'll go over this and the topization and then we'll spend the rest of the class talking about uh talking about um cost models. Okay. All right. Hit it. [music] Bats over the click clips over [music] [music] the [music] fortune [ __ ] [ __ ] maintain [music] flow with the brain. >> [music]

