[music] [music] I'm still ass. [music] [music] All right, guys. Let's get started. Round of applause for DD Cash. Awesome. [applause] Again, your bank account is is is taken care of now or just to wait for money to come in. >> It's getting better. It's getting better. >> Okay. Yeah. Again, I got to take it by DJ. I can make sure he's doing okay. All right, guys. Lot to cover. Um because there's a bunch of stuff we we didn't we didn't cover last class. Uh at the end,

we rushed through. I want to pick up on on that. So, again, midterm midterm exams. You want to come to my office hours after class today, you can come look at them with the solution. Homework four is due this Sunday. And then project three, I forgot this recitation was last night. I'll post that on Piaza after class with the video and the slides. Okay, any questions about homework four or project three? All right, so last class we were talking about the the query optimizer, right? And we sort of kicked off the discussion

talking about how the query optimizer is the component of the system that is responsible for taking a SQL query and then generating a physical plan execution plan that the data system can then actually execute. And we talked about how we went from the the the the SQL we parse it generate an apps index tree. We run it through the binder where where we resolve names of tables of column names and functions to actual internal identifiers. And then with that logical plan, we can do uh some additional transformations to uh without

considering a cost model to try to fix things up and make a little bit better than sort of a literal translation of the the the SQL query from the abstract syntax tree. Um and then we talked a little at the end, but we ran out of time and we'll pick up where we left off. Uh talking about the costbased search where we try to look at alternative plans, alternative physical plans and pick the one that we think is going to have the lowest cost. And again, I'm putting cost here in in parenthesis because the cost is going to

vary per per system, per environment, what you're trying to optimize for. But usually, you're going to try to optimize the amount of dis IO's in in a very basic cost model. Uh, but you can build upon that and do more sophisticated things like considering how much it takes to to compute a function or uh to process something that's in memory. And then we said the the the the way we determine or way we implement our our sort of costbased query optimizer the quality of the plans it's going to

produce is going to be a combination of these three factors. So what kind of transformation rules do we have that will convert the logical plan to another logical plan or logical plan to a physical plan and this allows us to enumerate over different permutations of the query uh the query plan and try to find one with a you know with a better cost. Um then there'll be the search algorithm which we we rushed at the end. We'll pick up again now. But this is the the method in which we're going to

explore the different possibilities of alternative plans we have being generated by the transformation rules. So the numeration process then search for them and try to find better better choices. And then the cost model piece that we'll talk about at the end that's where we try to predict what will be the expected runtime behavior of a query plan. Not so much to trying to to generate an absolute value like this query is going to take 15 seconds or you know you're not trying to pick something

that's going to be like something you can measure in the real world. What you're really trying to do with this cost model is to identify whether one query plan is better than another. So this cost model will be an internal metric we use that is in you know that that the database optimizer can only use. So whatever cost model that my SQL is using they spit out a number say this is the cost of a query plan that's meaningless in Postgress or Oracle or pick your favorite database system. So

this the cost model is the internal me mechanism we use to figure this out. So for today's class we'll we'll come back to the search algorithms the top top to the top to the bottom versus bottom to the top. uh and then we'll talk about the kind of statistics we would collect and then the cost models we use to estimate the cardality of the operators because that's going to be the big thing what we have to determine how much work a query is going to uh consume or or or use because that's going to tell us how

much data we're sending between the different operators. Okay. And again just to preface this this is super hard. This is the hardest part of of of database systems. I I this is the part I know the least about. Uh so you know don't feel like if you're not following this along this is super challenging or we're barely scratching the surface here. Uh and like long as you understand the high level concepts that's that's what really matters and then the details of this maybe only matters if you actually go

end up building a query optimizer. All right. Right. So again, the search alg is is the way we're going to again enumerate or look at different alternative plans or choices we have for both logical operators and and and their corresponding physical operators in our our query plan. And the two the two approaches either start from the bottom and work your way to the top sometimes called forward chaining. Um and then the the the alternate approach is start from the top and then you work your way to

the bottom to to the leaf nodes. And again, conceptually they're sort of the same at a high level, right? The thing they're trying to produce is the same. They're trying to generate a physical plan that I can then go execute, but there's some nuances to uh to the different approaches in terms of like how much um uh like how much backtracking or how much redundant work you would have to use you could possibly uh encounter while you're generating these query plans. And in particular,

the bottom one, they're going to make heavy use of memorization to avoid, you know, redundant superolous computations. All right, [snorts] so bottom up basically is you start with the leaf nodes in your query plan. You basically start with nothing like here's how I'm going to access the individual tables and then I'm going to figure out now what order I want to generate the joins and other parts of the query plan. Uh, working the way to the top where you end up with the the final result that you

want. Like I want to join these tables and produce this output. top down is is the opposite where you start with with with what you want to produce. Start with what the outcome you want to be for the query and then you work the way down and try to figure out what operators I need to introduce to get me back to to that location. So the very first query optimizer uh that IBM built the first sorry very very first costbased query optimizer that IBM built in the 1970s in system R follows this top approach here and I'll show

this next slide. Most most open source data systems that are out today that you know about are doing something like this. Postgress is doing something that sort of looks like this. DB2 is doing this. The Germans do this but like on steroids. Uh and then duct DB follows a a some of the work that the Germans did at Munich 10 years ago. And it's it's following this approach as well. Right. [snorts] So again, the way this is going to work is that we're gonna we're use our transformation rules to do some

initial optimizations to again do predicate push down, do the things we know we're always going to want to do to optimize our query without actually consulting a cost model. And then we're going to use this divide and conquer algorithm uh that's going to again sort of search at sort of different join levels uh in the tree that I'll show in this next slide like which going to be the optimal joint ordering and what physical algorithm I'm going to want to use to compute the the different joins.

So let's say again we have we have a query like this. We're doing a three-way joint and artist appears an album. This is the example I showed at the beginning of the semester, right? And so in the system R implementation the first stage you you basically apply a bunch of transformation rules that try to figure out for each of the tables I need to access what's the best access method to use right and this one would be simple things like well I in the case of artist I don't have a I don't have anything I

could use as a as a as a as a filter directly on my table because there's no like you know where artist name equals something right so therefore I'm I'm going to want to do a scential scan but in the case of of the album table. I have an index on the name attribute. So I can use that in a uh in my in my predicate. So then now the next stage and this is where the divide and conquer piece comes in. Uh where we're going to we're going to seed out all the different possible join earnings I have for the tables,

right? Like do I want to join artist and appears an album first or appears album and artist first? Right? You just do this for all possible combinations including introducing cartisian products, right? because those those are still valid joins. And then now I'm going to run this uh dynamic programming algorithm, the divide and conquer approach where I'm going to again now start examining each of these different combinations I could have to get to my final outcome because I'm starting at

the bottom and choose the one that's going to have the lowest cost. >> Say it again. >> Correct. Yes. that kind of in this kind of scenario maybe >> right so state David is and he's correct in the last class I said that the largest uh query I've seen with with joins in terms of number of tables was like 1500600 something um and then wouldn't this explode in terms of number of choices you have to consider absolutely yes >> before explaining with what sorry

>> become so large that it stops like an early. >> Yeah. >> So he's correct like this is like [snorts] if I if I do this isn't going to be the search base is huge and therefore I'm never going to can even even try to get to something reasonable. So they're they'll do a bunch of things like throw away last class we talked about we throw away anything that's not a left deep join tree. So that throwways away a bunch bunch of possibilities I could have uh in terms of terms of these

orderings. I would throw away any cartisian products right away. That's easy. There's other things you can do like if I know it's a uh comment trick is if I know it's a there's a certain pattern to the schema that I'm always going to want to do joins a certain way then I can throw away anything that's not that. There's a bunch of heristics you apply to prune down the search base. We're not covering that here. That's more of the advanced class stuff. Um but

there's other like you can do um you can run like an approximation algorithm to get like a dirty start and then use that as the like you know dirty heristic to like kind of get some initial setting and then use that as the starting point rather than from starting from scratch. But we have to understand the the basic algorithm before we do start doing the advanced stuff. But the answer is right yes this gets huge. Postgress does this except if you have by default if you have 13 or more tables in your query.

They don't do this. They fall back to a genetic algorithm which I'm I'm not going to cover. I if I have time I can show slides but like that thing is like super broken and it doesn't work. Right? But that's what they do. It's basically an approximation because you can't do sort of this dynamic programming. >> What's that? >> His question is where's the number 13 come from? magic constant, right? Like you can you can change it. By default, it's 13. Some

people just turn it off entirely because it doesn't always it's not guaranteed good results. Yes. >> Is there aial version of the algorithm that works? >> The question is uh is there a potential version of algorithm that works? Um yeah. So I'm not there is a class of of optimization algorithms that basically are doing that are random like you can do simulated kneeling. You can do the the genetic algorithm from Postgress that's sort of the same thing like you're rolling the dice and see what

comes up like again you can't guarantee you're going to find the optimal because it's random like a random walk through a search space. Uh in the case of the Postgress one I mean it's a it's several factors right like is the implementation of the algorithm correct I think I think they said there was a bug I forget what it is like it's not truly random um and then it also depends on your cost model which we'll get in a second. If your cost model is crap, then who cares how

good the algorithm is? Like you just it's gonna make bad predictions. But if you're consistently crappy, then then maybe that's okay. Give me give me half. We'll get to that. Yeah. Yeah. The postcest one is the only one I know that does the random walk. The Germans do um if they if it's a less than 100 tables, they have an efficient implementation of the algorithm that they can find. They'll do the exact search, the exhaustive search above 100. Then they do uh they do sort of like the

the the approximation first and then that seeds a algorithm that does the more search. But that way you know you're throwing away things that you're never going to you know consider anyway. [snorts] All right. So the the basic the walk through the algorithm looks like this. So again at the bottom is my starting point and I want to get to the top here. So I'm going to work my way to the top and say okay I have three tables artist album appears. assuming I've already picked out what the the access method

I'm going to use. So now I got to figure out in what order I want to join these tables and what what physical operator what algorithm I'm gonna want to use hash joins versus sort join. Uh you know you'd also maybe consider nestloop join as well but for space reasons I'm not showing that and again I'm only showing certain uh you know three different combinations. This obviously would span out over here but it wouldn't fit in PowerPoint. So for now each of these pass up into the next level in the tree.

I would say okay this one over here is joining artist and appears and I haven't joined album yet. So I can either join do a hash join to join artist and appears. I can do an emerge join to do artist and peers. And for each of those now I can cost them use my cost model and say which of these ones are going to have a lower cost. And so for each of these pass up to the next level in the tree I'll I'll keep the one that has the lowest cost and throw away the others. And now at the next level I say I do the

same thing. So again, I've I've already joined artisan peers. Now I want to take the output of artist peers join and join it with album. So I'm going to do the same thing and look at all the possible combinations I have for different physical operators to do do that next level of the join. Then go back and cost each of them to figure out which one has the lowest cost going up to the to this the same level coming or coming from the same parent going up to the next level. Right? Throw away throw away all the

other ones. And then now for each of these paths up to the root or the top of the query plan, I'm going to pick which whatever one has the the lowest global cost across all these different choices, right? And then that's that's what you're deciding to be the lowest cost. Like it's divide and conquer. Rather than looking at all possible combinations, I'm just looking at each level like, okay, if we just join two tables, what's the different what's the different possibilities I have? And now

you can kind of see where some of these heristics could help prune the search base because you would say like well I going back here like if I if I know that the tables are so big that I'm never want to do a nestloop join don't even bother trying to add a nest loop join and considering that right. So back to his point there's more magic constants you could say like if the table's this size then don't consider nest loop joint. So another hack at all this is that the one is that instead of trying to so

instead of when we keep track of the best plans we we can ignore in what form we need the data to be in meaning like what are the physical properties of the data like sorting for example sorting is a physical property of data so in this case here I cannot consider any of that while I'm doing my like computing my joint order and then I can go back and then say after I've computed the the join uh the join order if I recognize that there isn't it isn't in the property that I need like I need the

data sort of in the artist ID uh if it's not if it's not like that then I can just graft on a sort at at the top up above or I can modify my cost model and recognize that going back here the the the mer sort merge join is going to put the data in the sort order that I need so I'll make sure that has a lower cost than the the hash join, right? The system R system R1 is pretty primitive, but the later ones you can consider this directly an end. Yes, question. All right, so this is bottom to the top

top down again, you're starting with the the the logical plan of what would be the final output and then now you're basically doing branch and bound search looking for uh a path down to to all the different leaf nodes so that you can have a complete query plan. Right? So the system R bottom to the top approach that was embedded in the 1970s. This approach came about in the late 80s early 90s. Um the the most famous implementation of this is something called cascades uh which is implemented

in SQL server green plum and cockroach and I think data bricks might be using this in their catalyst optimizer as well at least some some form of this. Um, and the basic idea is that as you're as you're traversing down and looking at different options in the query plan, uh, you keep track of the best plan you've seen so far. And then at some point, if you reach a path in the query plan where the current cost, you know, from from the route to where you're at now, if that's greater than the than the lowest

cost you've seen for a complete query plan, then you know, you don't need to keep going down in in that, you know, searching that part of the tree. You can just sort of cut it off and not have to look at everything. But the way you're sort of re potentially revisiting uh different choices uh this can get uh quite expensive because you could be revisiting things over and over again. So all these implementations are re rely on a memo table to or memorization table to keep track of like here's things I've

costed before don't cost them again. So the for the longest time the only sort of there was only a few scattered research papers that describe how to do this approach and in especially in the context of this thing called cascades. Um, but it was well known that SQL Server had been doing this since the 1990s. Like the guy that wrote that B+ paper we talked about before when we talked about the paralization stuff, the volcano and exchange operators. That's this one same guy got hired at Microsoft

in the late 90s. They threw away the old core they had and he rewrote it to be the the cascade style. And it probably is, you know, with with the exception maybe maybe the Germans, um, it probably it is the best choreizer. Certainly the best top down core optimizer. Germans have the best bottom up. And so for the longest time there wasn't a good de description of how to actually implement one of these optimizers till Microsoft put out a book last year. It's open source. You you can go down for free and

read it. That thing's amazing. It's the best book I've read last year in my life. Um like it describes all the detail not not all but many of the details of how SQL server does uh implements their query optimizer. But obviously we can't go too much detail in for this lecture but you know we take the advanced class we'll spend more time talking about this. All right. So again, top down obsation, we're start with what we want the the final outcome to be, right? So we want our final outcome in

this example here. Now we're going to do the artist appears and album. And now we're also going to include the the physical property we want as well. We want the data to be sorted by the artist ID. So now we're going to go through and apply a bunch of these transformation rules to either convert logical plans to other logical plans or logical plans into physical plans, right? We never go back from phys from physical back to logical. So here's sort of again similar to what we had before. Here's all the

stages of the of the sort of logical operators we have down below. And we would run we would run uh transformation rules to expand all all these things out. And then now starting from the root, we're going to go through and look at uh the different choices we would have to get to this final outcome up here. So we know that we want to join uh artist appears and album. So we say down below we we can join artists and appears uh after joining that and then we join with with uh with album and then this

one we use a merge join. So now instead of looking at all the possible combinations at the next level we actually traverse down into this and look at all the ways we would get to the that level going up and keep going down here. So now we say are we want to join artist and appears. So I can either do a hashing for that and I keep going down here and now we say how do I actually access these tables right and I would pick my my access method for that. But then now once I sort of reach the bottom, I then go back up and start

looking down another path because I'm doing death first search. I got to get to the bottom first before I start looking at at other levels. So then I come in artist appears and I can do possibly a merge join of that. Do the same thing. Come down and and figure out what the access methods are for these other operators. And this is where the memorization stuff helps because I'm revisiting like how do I want to access artists albums and appears at the lowest level in the trees as I'm calling and re

coming back down over and over again. I don't want to compute that cost every single time I revisit these things. So I just check the memo table to see whether I' I've seen I've visited this node before. All right. So you basically do that. Imagine this thing again standing out and getting getting quite large. And then there are without going too much details there's priorities you can set for the for these transformation rules so that maybe you want to look at hash joins before you look at merge joins.

Right? in case you run out of time in in your in your in your search, you at least have a plan that generates a bunch of hash joins. Even though it may not be optimal, but it's it's good enough. The other thing we have to do is is keep track of how we're going to make sure that the data has the physical property we want at at the top of the of the plan, right? Or actually really any level of the plan, right? We have this this this order by requirement that the data has to be sorted on artist ID. So

now if we go and look at like this operator here to do a hash join, we would know that that doesn't guarantee that data is in that property that we want. So we would not we know we don't even need to need need to actually go look at it, right? But then if we add a sort operator, it doesn't do the join for us, but it does put the data in the in the in the in this the form that we need. So we're allowed to go visit that and then again apply more transformation rules to say, okay, well, I still need to join

this data. How how am I getting it uh up to me? Right? So then now if I do a transformation rule and say now add the hash join when I cost it and I would see that oh adding the sort plus the hash join that's that cost is greater than the merge join path I seen before I don't even even consider it again going down. So maybe I'll skip this, but I just want to say that like the way they're going to implement the the uh to guarantee the data is in in the physical property you want. They just

add these enforcer nodes and it's just a way to say like make sure that nothing comes up to me that isn't ordered the way that I need it up above. And so I can do a bunch of transformation rules and I can I can match them on uh in the rules it would say this data will be in this form that you need or this data would not be in the form that you want. And so I only apply the rule the the rules that I know that I want. Then I have avoids again having to fan out and look at possibly everything. Right? So

in the sake of time I'll just skip this. I'm just trying to say that like you you can you can add this in uh as part of this first class property in the search. Okay. So that's the search the search algorithms. Again we go from we can either just do pure heristics and just apply them uh one after another until we put the data in the form that we or the query in a in a form that we actually execute. If we're going to do costbased search, then we either go top down versus bottom up. Most systems do bottom

up. The the more sophisticated, more more newer ones are doing uh top down, but it's super hard either either way. All right, so for all these different operators, when we talked about before, when we talked about query execution, we talked about different ways or different formulas we'd use to compute the amount of work they were going to do. Like when we talked about the different join algorithms, the sort merge joint, nestloop join, and the hash joins, we talked about them in terms of

how much data they were going to have to read in and how much data I got to write out, like how how many IO's they were doing. But the challenge is going to be now that we have uh you know, now that we're trying to build a real query plan, we have real data that we're going to be running on. It's no longer these sort of abstract numbers or these formulas. we actually have to come up with you know estimates for what this data is actually going to be. So like you know when we talk about those IO's how are we

actually computing them other than just me showing them on PowerPoint right and this is going to be hard to do because as we'll see the the the amount of data you may have to process if you're you know a join operator it's going to depend on how much data is being sent to you below you in in the query plan right and then the problem is going to get compounded because if I have multiple joins in my query plan right I can maybe do okay predict icting how much data is coming into me from the

scanning tables to my join. But now I take the output of that join and feed it into another join. Right? If my estimate for how much data is coming out of my my first join is off, then I have no, you know, I have no look uh I have no hope picking out a good estimate for how much data is coming out of the second joint, right? and for all these operators. Again, we can't just go execute the queries because if we could do that, then we could just, you know, we just run the queries instead of trying to

figure out, you know, for the thousands or even tens of thousands, millions different possibilities that I have, I can't each run those each individually. [snorts] So, this is where the the data systems cost model is going to come in. We're going to way it's a way for us to estimate the the the the amount of work an operator is going to have to do within a query plan given the current state of the database. And then what I mean the current state is like what the what the distribution of values look

like in the in the tables that you're trying to trying to access a query against. [snorts] And the the challenge of this is that the in some database systems or some applications the data is not not static. Meaning, if I'm running a website like Reddit, I'm getting new updates and new inserts all the time, and potentially the distribution of values could change. So, my cost estimates from today may look a lot different than what they might look like a month from now. They're usually not

too drastic, but like it's it can drift over time and cause problems. And as I said before, this this internal cost that we're generating is not going to be something that's related to the physical world. Usually, usually it's not some systems, but it's rare. it is uh it's gonna be really it's going to be this relative number that we just use to say whether one query plan is going to be more efficient or better than than another query plan and we can't take you know what our postgress estimates are

and apply them to my SQL optimizer they're completely separate notions. So the two types of components we would have in our cost estimates for an operator are be the physical cost and the logical cost. So physical cost would be the resource consumption of the of of of an operator of a query plan when the data runs that query right basic things we already talked about was like IO's how much how many blocks of data or pages of data I'm going to read from from from disk or or write to disk but

you can extend that out for other parts of of a of a computer right how many how many packets I'm going to send over the network how much time I'm going to spend in the CPU how many cycles to to do you some operation. Um cache measures are a little bit more complicated to the to estimate by getting more low level in part parts of the hardware it becomes more problematic. Um and of course obviously this is going to depend on how much uh you know what what my hardware actually looks like what my CPUs look

like how much C you know L3 cache do I have. [snorts] So typically most systems are going to do uh IO's as the as the the dominant factor. You maybe also want to include how much memory I'm going to consume in my operator because obviously that's a finite resource. For CPU cycles, the high-end systems can be a bit more smart about this. The something like Postgress sort of say, you know, if something's in memory, what's the relative cost of of of accessing something in memory,

processing in memory versus like reading something from disk? That's a a loose approximation for for for you know coming in and out. logical cost would be the estimated output size per operator. And what's what's nice about this at least logical cost is that no matter what physical operator I choose, the logical cost has to be the same, right? So if I'm joining table A and table B, they're you know, no matter whether you do a servers join or nest loop join or a hash join, you

know, it's going to produce x number of tupils. So sometimes there's logical costs can be used to prune things out before you're actually looking at all the different physical operator physical operator choices for a uh for for a query plan. But where the problem is in order for me to predict how much data my operator is going to spit out I got to know how much data is coming in and now now you get this sort of recursive problem we'll see later on. [snorts] So just showing postress as an example

again this is this I would say this is the most basic simplest cost model you can have. So what they care about is again the CPU cost and then the relative cost for different different types of IO I might might perform like random IO versus sequential IO and then you weight them these different factors based on some magic thing magic constant you can specify in the in your configuration of the database system right so they'll say if something's in memory that's be 400 400 times faster than reading something

from from a disk and if you're reading something that's sequential IO reading a sequence of pages that are that are one after another that's going to be 4x faster than doing random IO. So if you go look at the postgress documentation you you'll see all the definition of these parameters like sequential scan cost random page cost these are you know these are numbers you can specify these waiting factors but it has this huge blurb right here that says basically warn you saying hey look these

are kind of just like you know there isn't a good way to exactly determine these values because it changes per for for different hardware and so they're sort of meant to be a you know a good guess estimate of what you should do right And if you change them too much, they say you have problems because you end up picking bad query plans. So this is like I would say postgress cost model is not very sophisticated. It's the bare minimum you would need to have a say you have a a cost model in your data system. The

high-end systems like DB2 and Oracle and those guys, they do all sorts of tricks to try to figure out what these actual values are. Like when when you turn on DB2 from IBM, they'll run a bunch of microbenchmarks to figure out what is the cost of reading something from disk, what is the cost like what is the actual time it takes to send a packet over the network? how fast is my CPU and they use that in their cost model instead of these magic constants that you set in in Postgress, right? You can still override

that but it's trying to compute things for you uh on their own because that's trying to reflect the real hardware. So again, if your database moves from one machine to another, the they'll automatically update. Yes. >> Their question is their question is why doesn't Postgress do something more sophisticated? It's hard. Nobody and also too like create apper like nobody wants to touch it in postgress [snorts] because it's it's very brittle right um I mean like there's

I would say it would be it would be easier for them to add add the sort of DB2 calculations that I mentioned the micro benchmarks that's easier thing to do than rewriting the whole like the whole engine it's like whole the query oper >> that would be a major overhaul >> [snorts] >> Yes. I mean, if you ever like looked in Linux, like if you ever looked like slroc CPU info or do lscpu, you'll see see a thing called bogo myips, right? That's a microbenchmark when Linux

starts up that that when you so that it uses that as the timing for like scheduler, right? It's it's approximation how the hardware actually is, right? [snorts] I would say also too postgress like in the like the high-end systems DB2 like they're distributed parallel systems. So like they need to worry about like how much takes time you know send data over the network and because they can also have uh be aware of maybe storage taring like fast local storage versus remote storage. They need

to know what those times are as well. Post has no notion of those things. It just has table spaces. Okay. So the way we're going to get these estimates of how much work we think our operator is going to do, right? how much how many data you think we're going to process is going to be through statistics. And so when people talk about in your data system you they're keeping track of statistics, it's basically an internal metadata that the data center is going to collect on your data. They then you

use in the query optimizer to try to figure out what is the again expected work for either logical level or the physical level for the for the different operators, right? And again, we we have we need to have these summaries because we can't actually just run our queries on the real data. Although we can do sampling. We'll see that in a second. But like you can't run the full query because again by by that point I've already produced the answer I you know I would want to run the query and getting

the wrong join order. You know sometimes you can be a thousandx worse than than picking the optimal plan. So we want to avoid all that. Of course now the challenge is nothing comes for free as it often the case in systems and data system and computer science. So there would be this trade-off of how accurate you want our our statistical summaries to be versus how how much time you want to spend computing them, how much storage space you want to maintain or use to maintain these things. Uh the you

know when things get updated in the database, do I stop what I'm doing immediately and go update my statistics or am I allowed to get a little bit out of date and you know sort of suffer those consequences, right? So, so there's no one way there's no one sort of set of criteria I can say this is what you always want to do. It depends on so many different factors but most systems sort of implement um they sort of implement one sort of uh approach to doing statistics SQL server and the high-end systems can

do more but like like in Postgress there's only you know they have pretty basic statistics and you either run them which next slide you either run them when you ask it to or you run it when you do background maintenance things right all right so again the way we're going to store these statistics is that they're just going to be another table in our database, right? It's a special table, an internal table in the catalog, but we're not going to store this in in memory in a heap in separate space.

We're just stored as a regular tupil. So that way we get all the the the storage and durability guarantees that we'd have in a you know as regular data. And as I said, I already said before like the when the when the data what triggers the data center to go collect the statistics depends on the implementation. It could be things like you know at like in Oracle's case I think it's like 10 pm at night they just run a job that you know automatically go collect new statistics for the day right for the next day right

in Postgress if you modify a table so much by I think like 10% or 20% then that goes ahead and triggers off the the the background job to go collect statistics and again you can manually do this using either in post it's analyze in other systems called update statistics so let me go a quick demo of but they that you can see these things just to prove to you that they're just regular tables. Um, and there's nothing nothing special about them. Uh, let me log in. So, turn off the lights. Although that might

kill the camera, but whatever. I probably should do that. Whatever. All right. So, this is Postgress. Um so Postgress has this table called PG statistic. It's a again anything with underscore PG is um like and a name like that that's that's an internal catalog for for Postgress, right? So I see a bunch of stuff. What does this actually all mean? So let's do it on on a per table basis. So remember before I had this enroll table um in my examples, right? Right? This had, you know, five five

records in it keeping track of what grades of people was in the class. Right? So I can go to PG statistic and say give me the give me the statistics for for this table. Right? So that's kind of hard to read, but so let me put it in this sort of extended form. Right? So when you think of like each block here is going to be a you know is is one row in the table. So what do we see? We see that we have the the table name enrolled. We have the attribute name, the column name, SID. Then we have some other stuff about like the number

of distinct values, most common values, most common frequencies. They don't have any histograms here because there's not a lot of data. But you can see like they're keeping track of a bunch of things and they're just rows and arrays in in in the table, right? And so if I go ahead and kill this, let's just delete the the stats for uh you know for this table. Now when I go back and try to read it, right, nothing shows up. So if I tell Postgress to uh run analyze on that table, take 23

milliseconds because it's you know it's fits on one page. And then now when I go back, I see again all the same stats as before. And this is what we're going to use in our in our cost model to figure out how much data actually exists uh when I when I do estimations. So just give you what a what a real table might look like with real stats. So this is from the our encyclopedia dbdio. Um [snorts] now you can see see now you have this histogram bounds. You have uh other here the histogram bounds. There's no frequent

values for any of these but like you you basically see like again it's storing this one is for is current true false and you have the frequency of of those right most of the data in this is where the is current is set to false. So again, it's just there's nothing magic about this. They're just data structures stored in uh s store sort as a regular table, [snorts] but it's not something you should be maintaining or doing yourself. Like the data should just do this for you, right? And this is what I've already

said before like so for every single column in a table, the data system is going to go try to collect these statistics and basically maintain some histograms and other other things we'll talk about in a second. Um so sometimes in some systems they'll also track the statistics for groups of columns or groups of attributes. These are called correlated statistics. So if I know that uh like if there's a correlation between like zip code and city like every city can only be in one zip code. So instead

of treating them as independent uh variables I know they're correlated and I can compute stats on those combination of those two columns together. So then when I do my estimations I get I get better better uh better results. So the in in SQL you can say create correlated statistics you can tell it I want to create statistics on multiple columns. Uh in some systems like SQL server if you put two columns together in an index this the data system says oh well they must be important they must must go together so let me compute the

correlated statistics uh for them together. Right? Otherwise, because it's it's, you know, it's it's it's combinatoral the number of different choices you have of correlated statistics. You don't want to generate all these things. That'd be sensitive to do. So, they try to use tricks to figure out which one they actually combine together. All right. So, there's be four approaches for how we want to maintain our statistics, right? Our four different type of statistical data

structures. The first is going to be histograms. This most common thing this what we saw in Postgress and this just for each occurrence of a unique value within a column count the number of times that it shows up or you can put bucketing them together and we'll see that in a second. [snorts] Uh another one would be sketches. You've already saw in a sketch in project zero the count min sketch and these are statistical approximations or sorry probabilistic data structures that can approximate the different factors

aspects of the data. Sampling would be when we t maintain a small snapshot or small subset of the original tables uh and use that to estimate statistics or in some cases maybe run like many queries against the real data and then try to extract the statistical properties of the data uh from that sample. And then the last one would be the more more modern techniques using machine learning models that try to learn the cardality current learn the the statistical properties of of tables. So in terms of what systems implement

what the very top histogram is the most common one because they're the easiest in the in the modern era the last 20 years or yeah about 15 20 years sketches are becoming more common and you can use these in combination with each other. Sampling is very rare. I think only the Germans and Umbra and SQL server do use sampling. I'm not aware of any other system does sampling. Uh and then ML stuff, nobody's putting this in production yet. The research is very promising, but it's still it's very

early. [snorts] >> Yes. >> The question the question is how do I deal with very high high columns? This these slides here. Yes, we'll get there. Yeah. [snorts] All right. So again, histogram is just think of like a hashmap where you keep track of a hash table keep track of like for every unique value in my column. I'm going to maintain the number of times that I've seen it. Right? So say I have I'm keeping track of people's age or something like this and it's only for

people age 1 to 15, right? I just keep track of for every single unique value. Here's the here's the number number of occurrences that that they have. So in my toy example here, I'm going to I have to maintain the original column, the original data in the table itself. But now I got to maintain this other histogram that keeps track of every sing unique value I have in that column. So my example here, it's small, right? It's only 60 bytes plus the maybe 32 or 64 bytes for each occurrence. But think in

terms of like billions of entries in a column, right? to store one billion values with 32-bit numbers, it's going to be uh four gigs like four four something. Yeah, four point something gigs, right? So that's not the the data itself. That's the histogram about the data from one column. So for every single column I got to make if I'm going to record all the unique values and and the counts for them, then that's obviously going to be really really big and I don't want to do

that. >> What's that? The question the count is small but still like could be right. Um yeah in that case if if every value is unique then the count is one. Yes and that's small. >> You can bit pack that. Yes but still like it's that's for one column in one table. If my table has 100 columns or hundreds of columns then it becomes super expensive to do. [snorts] So we gota we gota we got to reduce the size. And there's a couple tricks to do this. One is do an equidith histogram

where instead of storing every unique value as a with their own separate count, I'm going to bucket them together uh where the the size of each bucket will be the same. Like the width of the bucket is going to be the same, hence the name echo width. So I would convert my original histogram into something like this where I'm just going to store now the range of values that I have and then a separate count for that, right? >> [snorts] >> So if now I want to get the estimate like say does something equal something

how many times is that going to occur? I would figure out what bucket it is it's in take whatever the count is and divide it by the number of values in the bucket like size four. Again we'll cover those formulas in a second. Another approach is to use equidith histograms and these are shown to be better than equidith because they are uh because again you're for the for the the heavy hitters they're not going to get sort of lost in the noise with a bunch of low rank or low occurrence uh values.

So the idea is here now I don't want the width of the bucket to be the same. I want the height of the bar per bucket to be the same. So in this case here the the height of just putting 14 and 15 together the height combining them will be 12 right versus like bucket three here I'm going to put 9 10 11 12 13 and the height of that is going to be nine right so this is a way to sort of handle the outliers because now they're going to be sort of uh you have a more accurate count because there's fewer

elements within each each bucket potentially. So now related to to his his problem or his question their question about like what about uh if I have like heavy hitters or values that occur a lot wouldn't be nice to have you know accurate counts of those things. So I can do what's called an Nbias histogram where I'm going to use n minus one buckets to keep track of an exact count for the most frequent keys that I see. And then for everybody else, they get thrown in this last bucket R that's just trying to say,

okay, well, you know, you're probably not gonna need these keys that often. They don't occur that often. So therefore, it's okay to have a less accurate count for those guys. So you just basically look at what are the all my most frequent keys and then I store them as again exact counts, but then everybody else, sorry, everybody else just ends up with this R1 over here. >> Yes. So >> the question is if if the distrib if the distribution of the values change where now there's a new most frequent

key do I have to rebuild this? Yes. And that's what the analy that analyze command I did basically goes through wipes away whatever my histograms are and recomputes them. Now post be a little bit try to be a little bit more clever and do things like uh keep track of without running analyze my explicit analyze but like without if I'm doing this sort of incrementally I can keep track of here's the pages that haven't modified since the last time I analyze them. So don't don't reanalyze them and

then you have to incrementally update update these things but again that that can you can cause errors and then cause problems but whatever like it's an approximation anyway so you're already you're going to be errorrone. Yes. >> How the histogram is implemented in the case of postcript I showed you. It's just an array of values. Nothing fancy. [snorts] All right. Sketches. Again, I think uh the countman sketch we've already covered, but there's basically versions of of sketches that that

provide different uh can answer different questions like what's the most frequent items? I use countman sketch. How do I count the number of distinct items? uh efficiently I use a hyper log log and there's a lot of great open source imitation now uh the Apache data sketches is probably the best one originally started out in Java but now I think there's there's there's implementations in Rust and C++ right those are those are probably the best ones but Google Zetta sketch I don't

think they're actually maintaining that anymore um but it is an open source one so you can replace all your histograms in theory with sketches uh because they'll give you the same sort of they sort of answer the same kind questions and in some cases they're they're more easily mergeable than than histograms. Um but the you know they they have different different properties. All right. So I'm going to skip the countman sketch and the hyperlo log stuff. Um because I want I want to get

to the um let me cover sampling real quickly. Um because I I we want to get to the cardality stuff because we need that for the next homework. All right. So sampling again is just that you have a subset of the table or the data or you you examine a subset of the table the data you want to access and try to predict the the properties of it. So you can either maintain a separate read only copy of of of your data like a small portion of it and then you do all your estimates on that thing on that on that

sample or you can do a sample against the real data. Um but you got to be careful not to interfere with queries that are actually running uh for real not just sampling information. And so the way uh SQL server does it, they do it, they do the first one. I don't know of anybody does that does the second one. Uh my SQL kind of does the second one, but they're not really sampling to get stats. What my SQL will do in some cases, they will recognize you have like a subquery in the middle of the

optimizer, stop what they're doing, go run that query for real, and get the result back. So it's it's not exactly sampling like but it is going as the real data. Um in SQL server's case if they when they start running the optimizer if they recognize I don't have stats uh like when the query shows up they'll stop the optimization process run analyze and go collect a sample and go collect statistics and then come back to the optimizer [snorts] right because they don't they don't make bad

predictions all right so basic idea is like this like you have a table of a bunch of people you want to find people all in your database that are that are above age 50 so the sample would basically do a random uh pick random tupils from this uh and there's different ways to do uh you know more sophisticated types of sampling and then I have my little sample here I have Obama Tupac and DJ cache and I have their status what what's going on when their lives and then now what I want to estimate what

the selectivity is for all the people that are age uh greater than 50 in this case here it's only Obama is that old because Tupac's dead and he's only 21 you 21 or 20 how old are you 23 off by two Right. Uh so in that case here the table the the probability of people above age 50 is is one/ird and that you would say that roughly maps to what it is in the in the real table. Right. [snorts] All right. So with either samples the the sketches or the histograms we now want to predict the the cardality of the

different operators. how much data or how many tupils is each operator going to produce because then we can use that to say well how as a as a as a the backbone for other decisions like all right how many tuples I'm going to produce that'll determine how much data I may have to read or write in my other operators in in my query plan [snorts] and so the the basic things we need to be able to predict is what the selection conditions could be for filters like if I have a predicate on a table how many

tupils are going to match that predicate and therefore how many pupils are going to come as as as the part of the output or if I do a join and I join two tables together how many tuples are going to be produced from doing that join and then likewise if I'm doing like a distinct value estimation for like a group by clause how many tuples do I expect to come out of that so if you have those three estimations then that's the the building block you need to do more complex things like multiple joins and

and group eyes and other sorting things. So the way this is going to work is that we're going to produce what are called derable statistics that we can extract from the statistical summaries the JSON has collected and and built for our from our tables. And so for this we'll say you know the the n subscript r say the number of pupils we have in the relation. And then we'll have this new function v that's going to tell us the number of distinct values we would have for an attribute a. So not saying like

again this point like is it greater than a or less than a. just saying like for a given value a how many occurrences do I have of this in my in my columns and then I want to comput what's called the selection cardality is going to be the average number of tuples that I expect to produce for a given attribute a given the number of of of tupils that I have in my relation and then from this that's what we use to basically estimate the the selectivity so depending on what the predicate looks

like there's different formulas we're going to use for the statistics we've collected And we use histograms as as the basic version of this to say here's here's the number of tuples I expect to qualify for my my my predicus or whatever it is the operation I'm doing and therefore that's the number of tuples I expect to come out of my of my operator. So let's look at the easiest one. Easy one's going to be a a a predicate where age equals nine an equality predicate

something equals something right? So if I had my histogram I had before and I had the you know the the exact number of occurrences per for every sing unique value then compute the selectivity of this predicate it's just taking the number of occurrences divided by the the number of unique values that or unique uh number of tuples that I have in my in in my table right so now for this activity age equals 9 I just go look at my histogram what's the number of pupils I expect to match in this case four so

therefore or the selectivity of this predicate is 4 / 45 and I get 0.088. So this is saying that for all the the the the tubles that are in my table people or table r here when I apply this predicate 0.08 will match but again we said that we don't want to maintain an exact count for the number of values in a histogram. We want to use one of these equidith ones for example. So now my approximation is going be based on whatever bucket I land in case here age nine lands this one 9 to 13 inclusive. So now my estimation is going

to be the the the count here for this bucket which is nine divided by the number of values that are within this range of the bucket five. Then now that gives me my estimate here. What's the problem with this approach? Yes. The statement is it it represents not multiple predicates but multiple values in the bucket, not just the one I'm looking for. Absolutely. Yes. I'm also assuming that like the it's a continuous range of values, right? In this example here, it's it's it's people aged 9 to

13. not a big deal but like think of like really big tables with really big you know really big numbers I may have gaps in in that sequence right so I'm assuming here that like for all the values that appear in this bucket they the they occur with the same probability as all the other values in the same bucket that's why I'm dividing by by five so the dirty secret in cost models is that there's a bunch of assumptions we have to make because we don't accurate statistics and a complete

view of the data. Those are assumptions we have to make in our formulas in order to make this thing probably even tractable. And again, I keep bringing up like, oh, the enterprise systems do this, Oracle does that. Like this is what the this is what you this is one of the big difference you're going to get when you pay, you know, Oracle millions and millions of dollars and and SQL server millions of dollars for your data their data systems like their cost model is be way more sophisticated. Their form is be

way more sophisticated than what Postgress has. And to their point, can't just post write a better one. Sure, but like you need people that are like experts in in query optimizers and they're not they're not cheap, right? A lot of them are the best ones at SQL Server or the Germans, right? So, one of the assumptions we're going to make is that we're going to assume that the distribution of data is be uniform that the occurrence of every single value within a column is going to

appear with the equal probability of other all other columns or other values in that same column. Now, we can mitigate this a little bit by keeping track of the heavy hitters, right? Keeping track of the most frequent values separately in the NBIS histogram. But for everything else that isn't a heavy hitter, we we have to make this assumption and and it falls apart some cases. Now, we have also do a range predicate. We'll see this problem again, right? So, here I want to say give me all the

people that are age greater than seven, greater than equal to seven. Well, I know that I want to include everybody all the values up up above nine and above, right? Because it's greater than equal to seven. So I know that from starting at this bucket range here over there, I want to include all of that in in my my estimation, right? So I know that the number of occurrences will be at least 9 + 12. But the challenge is going to be this middle one here where seven is in the middle between six and

eight. So again, if I'm assuming uniform distribution of the the possible values, I'm going to say uh take the count of 12 divide by three because there's three unique values inside this bucket and I multiply that two because I know it's at least seven or eight in this, right? So I get my estimation like this. But again, as I said, not only are we assuming that the values are uniform, we're also assuming the values are continuous. For my small range here, it's not a big deal, but think of really

large numbers. You could have gaps and you may be counting tupils that appear that don't actually exist, but you don't know because you're trying you're based on approximations. [snorts] Negation is is is pretty easy, right? A not equals, it's just the opposite, the inverse of of equals. So all we have to do is say, all right, for age doesn't equal two, well, I figure out what is the selectivity of age equals to, which I would land in this bucket here. do the same formulas that we had before and

then whatever that is that's what I I take one minus that because it's it's I know that if it's equal this it should be in here it's not equal to that then it's all these other ones here so the key observation and maybe already slipped up and said this already is that we are at the end of the day the selectivity estimates they're just probabilities right what's the probability that a that that a pupil will match within whatever data I'm looking at according to my

predicate and based on what my predicate is I can go apply these different formulas. So okay well this is if it's a single predicate like something equal something something you know not equal to something then that's pretty straightforward but now if I have multiple predicates then it gets more tricky and now you come back to like stats 101 and you can just make other assumptions to to simplify the problem which again at the cost of accuracy. So in this case here I have two predicates age equals 2

and name like a wild card right and so for each of those separate predicates I can calculate different selectivities for them right but now how do I combine them right if you go back to like a simple ven diagram you sort of think of like this the first pink circle is the first predicate and the blue circle is the second predicate but what I really want to find is this middle overlapping part here so how can I do that in statistics If you assume they're independent uh the two independent predicates then

you can just multiply them together and produce the output or get the selectivity that way. So the second big assumption all these cost models are going to make is that your predicates are independent, right? And that assuming it's all conjunction clauses that you take the first probability or the first selectivity computed for the first predicate and you can multiply it by by another predicate for uh again for for disjunction is a bit more complicated but you basically you know the math sort of works out like

this right. The challenge of course is going to be that oftentimes or in many cases these aren't independent, right? And and your your estimates can get way off. And so there's a bunch of little statistical tricks you can do to try to mitigate this problem because you're going to end up you're going to end up underestimating what the true cardality or reflectivity is going to be. They won't talk about this too much but in the case of SQL server what they did started doing in 2014 they have a in

the book they talk about this is that when I start having a lot of predicates that are all and together in conjunction clauses I rank them based on their selectivity. So the ones that are most selective independently are the ones I put in sort of the front of the of the so the clause clause. But then all subsequent predicates I'm going to diminish their their their their probability by some waiting factor that that exponentially goes down so that I end up predicting I don't I end up underpredicting less because if I

multiply them together then I can get to really small predictions that are way off. Again, we we'll cover that more in the advanced class, right? So, uh disjunction again for ores just trying to find this whole thing and you just assume that they're independent and like this. All right. So, let me show the problem of of correlated attributes and you'll see why the Microsoft trick sort of works. So, this is a really simple example from uh a famous IBM researcher from a few years ago. Save a simple

database that has two tables or has you makes and models, right, for cars. And then [snorts] a query shows up where I say find me all the records where make equals Honda and model equals accord. Right? So if I apply the two assumptions I've talked about so far, the independence assumption and the uniformity assumption, then if I plug and chug my formulas, I end up with a with a selectivity like this. So again, I have 10 makes like Honda, Toyota, and Ford, right? So if I'm trying to find

where make equals one, you know, Honda, one match. So that's be one over 10. So one out of 10 tup two bowls will match. If I'm trying to find an accord, you know, say I have 100 cards and one of them is a chord, then that's be one over 100. Now if I assume those two probabilities are independent, I multip multiply the two together and I get 0.001. But we know that's incorrect as humans because who makes an accord? Only Honda, right? So the correct selectivity is really one over 100,

right? Okay, we don't need that one over 10 part to multiply that. So, all right. So, you see there's there's small numbers. You know, you say, "All right, that's not not that far off. Who cares?" But you're actually order magnitude off. And so, again, think of think of huge tables, right? I went from thinking there's, you know, 100 million tupils uh or yeah, when it's really a billion tupils, right? That's huge and that that that's going to matter.

So again, this is why the Microsoft trick what they try to do is uh if you they'll say, "Well, I'll I'll do the one over 100 first and then I'll still do the one over 10, but I'll put a little weight factor on it so that it it's not as pronounced in in my final calculation." So they're never going to be exactly 0.001, but it won't be as bad as being an order of magnitude off. Again, it they it's a it's a trick that works for them. I don't think everybody

else any else does it. I don't know whether I don't think there's any statistical guarantees you can extrapolate from it. All right, the last one I'll talk about is how to join size estimation. And this is where can this is where it all falls apart. Um [snorts] so the problem I'm trying to solve is I got two two relations R and S. And I want to say what's the range of possible sizes of the number of tupils I expect to come out of doing that join. Right? So how many tuples are going to

match based on my join predicate. So think about all the things I said that are hard to do just dealing with one table trying to figure out what you know you know for a predicate on it. How many tables that come out of that? Now I got to say I got two tables and how what's the con what's the the likelihood that the values in in one table is going to match when I do my join and the values in the other table and you know if it's if it's all primary key lookups that that you can maybe figure

it out be okay but if it's like primary key foreign key where it's like one tupal in the outer table will match multiple tupils in the inner table things get really bad or things get bad things get really bad when it's like It's N to N or M to M. Right? I have multiple tools in in the outer table match to multiple tools in the inner table. You're screwed. It's all over. Right? [snorts] So, one of the assumptions that we're going to make this all work is that we rely on what's called the

containment principle. And this is saying that we expect that there will always be a match in in the the and for the inner table key with the outer table key. If you have to start figuring out that there there aren't going to be matches then then it just the estimates get like completely screwed up and wrong. Right? Again we're just simplifying the problem in by sacrificing uh you know the accuracy of our estimates in exchange for making it actually more trackable that we have statistics that can figure this out.

[snorts] So the formula looks like this right? You basically say, you know, what's the what's the estimated size of the number of tuples I'm going to match from the the the outer table with the inner table? So R to S and likewise going the other way, what's the number the tubas are going to match from S going into R. Right? So I had that basically these two formulas there. So the cardality estimation for the join is going to be the basically the size of the cartisian product of the tables in

the tupils in R and tupils in S divided by with the max selectivity of either of these two two choices like the size of the tupils are going to match in R from R to S the size of the tub is going to match from S to R in the back. Yes. Yeah. So statement is I said that [snorts] you could have a join that does match M tupils in R to M tupils in S. How does the containment principle handle that? It doesn't question what do you do if that's if it happens? The benefit of the containment principle, it allows us to

use a simplified uh formula to estimate the the the number of tools I expect to come out of the join, right? Without it, if I had to consider the case, I don't like we're not talking about left out of joints, but like like I don't have matches, then like the formula doesn't doesn't work. [snorts] again like these are all in the textbook when I'm describing like and this is essentially what Postgress does that there's again it's it's uh it's not good but like but like there's

nothing else right other than you know running running on samples would solve all this because you just you do the join of the sample right but if you're based on histograms or even sketches this is essentially what what you have right [snorts] all right let's walk through an example uh and see again I'm not trying to be like super depressed or dow about all this, but let me just show you like why this is super hard and why everything why it's it's like why things get really

bad. We're basically going to show how we're going to propagate errors from our our bad estimates of the the bottom to our bad estimates in the middle and then produce bad estimates at the top just gets gets multiplicative. So the very first thing we do say this is the query plan we want to uh run and again for this one we don't have to have the physical operators we can just do this at the logical level to try to predict how many tools to expect to come out of each different operators. So for A and A

and C there's no filter on it. But in the case of B uh we have this B is greater than 100. Um which actually I'm missing. I cheated in name space. I didn't show a filter operator but assume that's the the B greater than B ID greater than 100 at the bottom. Right? So for each of these I can compute the the selectivity of them. And for B I greater than 100 assume that I have again some histogram that allows me to do that that approximation. And then now I want to go at the next level in the

query plan. what's the cardality of the of the join operator right the the first one here so for this I use that same formula from the last slide I say okay I have these number two coming up from A and B and then what's the selectivity I expect for matching a ID to B ID or the selectivity of matching B I greater than 100 and then take the max of that and that's tell me going to be sort of the upper bound the number of tupils I expect to potentially come out of uh this you know this joint operator and

this again why we're doing the containment principle is that if I have to consider that I'm not going to have a match uh you know or doing a left outer joint where I'm producing more tables than I expect because I don't have a match then this this doesn't work but if we we simplify it it does work at least reasonably but then say now then I take I got to take the the output of that first join and now that's going to be fed as input to the next join right on the on the on the left hand side because

I need to know how many I to come in plus now the scan I'm doing on on on C. So now what we see is that we're we're we're starting with sort of basic estimations for the for the leaves of the cord plan, right? That one we might be okay with. But then when we start doing the join, we're taking the output of that join feeding that as the input to the next join. And so if our formulas and our estimates and our histograms are all off for the lower parts, then that just makes this even even worse going

up, right? Right. And so basically we have bad bad estimates here and then bad estimates here and and then for three tables not a big deal but think of like the 1500 table joint I mentioned before it's it's all house of cards going going to the top and the research literature shows that the all the data systems because of the these different assumptions I'm talking about they end up underestimating the number of tupils they expect at different operators and as you add more joints the

underestimations get higher and higher. And so, okay, so what's the problem with that? Well, now I I think I the size of the data I'm coming up to me at some higher point in the tree is low. So therefore, I don't want to do hash join because I'm only expecting 10 tupils. And so I I choose a nested loop join because that's really efficient if everything fits in memory. But then if I'm underestimating, I might be getting, you know, a million tupils and I really wanted a hash join. And now I'm doing

the, you know, the slow nested loop join. >> The question is, why can't you switch on the spot? >> [snorts] >> advanced class. So his question so what he's asking is um it's called adaptive join uh sorry adaptive query processing a AQP and basically what that is you put little hooks in the query plan to say when I generate when I when the optimizer gen generated this plan I expect the data to look like this I expect to get 10 tupless coming up therefore I want to do next loop join if

I see if I see more than 10 or more than some threshold stop what I'm doing throw away the work and switch now to a hash join Right. So, uh SQL server can do something like this. Uh uh Snowflake can do something like this as well, but they they for for group eyes and things like that, right? That's hard to do. Only the the high-end systems do it and it's very rare. Another the easier way to do this would be [snorts] if I I have these little hooks and say, "Okay, my estimates are

just way off." rather than try to be more fine grain in the adaptation that you're like you're talking about like change the hash this change the join algorithm you say well this is all crap give up stop the query throw away all the results go back to the optimizer and say hey look you you're way off here's what I'm really seeing and then let the optimizer run again and turn a new query plan and the thought process there is like all right well my query plan is so terrible it's

going to take an hour to run this so it's worth me to go back to the optimizer spend another I don't know couple you know 20 seconds or something get a better query plan because I may cut down the computation time in half. Of course, you obviously don't want to throw away what you've done if you're like almost near the end. Like it's that that's hard to do. Uh nobody does that one, I don't think. >> It's in the Yeah. So that's called adaptive query optimization. That's the

advanced class. This one that's basically you can you can you sort of figure out like the the the pain tolerance of or the the for how off you're allowed to be in your estimates and you annotate the query plan so that if you see you're way off you basically abort it and go back but you you want to do this at the bottom not not the top like if you if you've been running for the queries is going to take an hour you've been running for 59 minutes you don't want to give up and go back

>> dynamic across the to to that point yes the threshold I'm talking about should be dynamic based on where you are like based on uh the height you are in the query plan what the operator is uh what the data might look like how many like how many uh the size of the data at least I expect to see versus what I'm seeing right if it's you know you're reading 100 megabyte table who cares but like you know if you're in the pabyte range then yeah it matters yes >> say it again say it again sorry

Yes, >> the question is um I mentioned that um I don't I don't think I have slides here. Um I mentioned that uh most data systems underestimate in joins. What happens when you under when you overestimate? [snorts] So you may end up choosing a hash join when a nest loop join would have been faster. you may end up allocating your hash table size if you're doing hash join to be larger than it actually needs to be. Of course, the opposite if you underestimate if you if you if you underestimate the size and you end up

getting too big, you got to stop what you're doing and copy the hash table over. That's what postress has that problem. Um so like you end up maybe allocating more things than you actually need and you still could produce a bad query plan. All right, we have a few minutes left. So actually let me see if I have the slide here I can share. Oh, I might. Yes. Yes. Perfect. So, this is a paper um there's a there's a newer version of this paper uh that came out this year because I think

it won it won best or test of time award. Um so this is from the uh the advanced topics class I taught last semester but then I almost died and I couldn't teach the rest but it was on optimization right so this is a paper from the Germans from 2015 that basically was trying to measure how good the data system different systems are for doing cost model estimations um and so for this what they basically is they use the it's called the joiner benchmark it's the IMDb database it's it's not

that big but they have a bunch of queries that do a ton of joins in that on and they try to estimate how good the query model estimations are for the or the cost model estimations are for the cardality of the joints. I mean how many I expect to come out of each join as you add more joins in in your query, [snorts] right? So uh so this graph is from the from the paper from the Germans and so there's there's each of these runs going to be there's five different systems here, right? And a way I like how pulling one

cord kills the camera, too. Oh, it didn't like me. All right. Uh all right. So again the the there's five different systems here along the x the x axis here it's the number of joins they have right so that zero means it's a table on a single scan on a table by itself right uh and then you add more bone joints and so what you see here are the error bounds the line going across the middle that's where the that's the exact estimate or sorry the exact measurement of the cardality of the joint operators.

So if you're above the red bar, then you're overestimating. If you're below it, then you're underestimating. And you can see the the the error bounds for this, right? And so across all of them, as what you see is that they're all underestimating as you add more joins because of all those assumptions I talked about before where they're saying I expect I'm getting I'm to get fewer tupils out of my joint operator than than I than I than I actually will. And then now you're taking that

underestimation, feeding that into another joint operator that then underestimates even further, right? And that's the problem gets gets compounded for this, right? >> What's that? >> Uh this this one here. Yeah. Like the question is which one this is? Right. This one's overestimating. Uh actually I I seen the slides. I know what it's coming up. Um and then there's this one here that's like way way off. Okay. So let's play a game. Who Let's take a guess what the systems are.

[snorts] All right, I'll tell you the choices are uh Postgress, SQL Server, uh the German system, the fir first German system and Oracle. >> Uh what did I say? SQL server, Oracle, Postgress, uh the German system, maybe my SQL might be one of them as well. All right, so this one clearly is the is the worst. >> What do we think this is? >> Wait, I raise your hand. Okay, Postgress raise your hand to say Oracle by SQL the Germans SQL server. Okay. Um but the first one is Postgress. Last one is

Hyper. Ah it was DB2 was the other one. The worst one here is Oracle, right? Even though I made a big deal about how bad postcrist is compared to Oracle one. Like I mean this was over 10 years ago. So I think they fixed it since then. Uh but in this case here, SQL server is the only one doing sampling, right? And that's why their estimates are are better than the than than than the other ones, right? At least that attributes to that. Um in the case of the Germans, after this paper came out,

I think in their new system, they they then added sampling and it helps a little bit, but it's not it's not that great. But again like you know DB2 and Oracle these are systems that people working on for decades and spent millions of dollars of people you know time trying to optimize these things and they still get a way off. >> This is 2015. There's a newer one that came out I think this year. Uh and I I I think the Germans win again. Um okay. >> You actually don't know because it's

closed source. You don't know. They might have fixed it. >> I mean the question is like what do they what do they test it against? Uh I mean they they the Germans designed this benchmark for just this paper. So it's not like they may have gone back now since then and and improved it further, right? >> No no well there's new German system and a new German paper um that follows up on it. Okay. So this is just repeating what I already said. So right. Yeah. So just to finish up the

hope the main take away this is that again we're making a bunch of assumptions of what the data looks like and what the formulas are just to make this thing the problem actually work. But in practice again for real data uh especially data with a lot of turn a lot when it's changing all the time. It it um it it can get real bad real quickly. Right. And in the end of the day, what the cost model is trying to do is estimate the number of tools we expect an operator to spit out and we use that

to then to calculate how much work I have to do or where how much IO will have to do reading the data or writing the data. As I said, this is all problematic a lot of problems. [snorts] I was trying to teach as I said a the special topics class last semester of the spring all on optimization. We got up the cardality before I whatever I almost died. Uh and so there's not there's no lectures after 14. Um but if you like this kind of stuff you can check out the material here or check out that book from Microsoft that thing is

phenomenal and it explains how to do the the top down query optimizer. [snorts] Okay. All right. So next class we will then that's for query optimization. Now we're talk about transactions. So this will be the second hardest part of uh of a database system and oftentimes students mind starts to bend whatever because it's it's it's be a different notion of correctness when we start doing parallel things that maybe what you're what you're used to like not memory barriers in the same way in like

a low level systems class. Now it's going to have different notions of correctness and that don't seem to you know that aren't always going to be intuitive right away. Okay. All right. Hit it [music] flips acrobats over [music] [music] [music] the fortune [ __ ] maintain flow with the brain. >> [music] >> for [ __ ] Maintain flow with the grace. >> [music]

