[music] [music] I'm still associ. [music] [music] >> Okay. Again the recitation is available with the video. Please watch the slides and then post on pata if you have questions. All right for in terms of database talks today after this class we will have um CMUDB alumni Ryan Johnson. He did his PhD here in I think 2010 and he won the Jim Gray best ditation award in databases uh for Sigmod. So uh he's now data bricks uh working on Delta Lake. Delta Lake is going to smell a lot like the hoodie stuff and the iceberg

stuff and the duck lake stuff. So it's sort of in in that sort of same space. It was data bricks version of iceberg. Uh it didn't get the quite the adoption that iceberg had. Uh so they paid a billion dollars for iceberg like as one does. Uh if you're data bricks tomorrow at noon in in the gates building we're having uh somebody give a talk from Uber uh talking about the the Apache Penino project that they use internally. Um and sort of talk about the various things they tried throughout the the years and

why Pino is is was the right choice for the problems that they were trying to solve. And that one will be food and that one's uh own gates. And then a week from now we're having the the other database startup that data brought bought this year called moon cake. And this is iceberg is using ductb to connect to iceberg inside of postgress. Um and again all these are optional. All right. So at this point in the semester where we're at is that the we've we've kind of we've gone up the

entire stack right like we started off talking how to how to read and write things at disk in your buffer manager talks about how to manage memory. Above that we talked about how to actually access access tables that we're storing in our buffer pool and that are based on in our disk manager. Then we talked about how to uh build the query engine to actually execute queries. And then the last two lectures was about how do we take a SQL query from the application convert that into an optical plan that

we can actually run and execute inside of our system. Right? So at this point in the semester you know how to build sort of a first pass uh first implementation of a endto-end database system taking SQL queries all the way down to data on disk. But [snorts] obviously we're not done yet because we still have two more weeks left in the semester. Right? What we've built so far is a nice database system, but it's not suitable for production because it's not safe, right? We haven't talked about how

do you if you crash, how do you make sure you come back and you don't lose data. We haven't talked about if you have two queries trying to update the same thing at the same time, right? How do you make sure that's safe and and reliable? So, that's where we're going on this point of the semester for the next three weeks. And and we're going to talk about concurrent protocols and recovery management, right? And the reason why we don't really show that in this sort of the the stack hierarchy

that I was showing before at the beginning of the semester is because these concepts and these components are going to overlap and and be intertwined with all the parts of of the system. So the bufferable manager you build for project one had no notion of transactions, no notion of of whether it was read safe to write data out to disk. Like when when your when your eviction policy algorithm ran, you just said, "All right, this page is not dirty. I can, you know, I can throw it away or this page is dirty. I'll write it out to

disk. But we'll see as we as we go along. There's actually another notion of of safety we have to be aware of to know when there's actually safe to actually write that data. So if we end up crashing, we don't come back with an invalid database state. We don't come back with corrupted data, right? What again? What if a tupol touches two pages right for a single update and only write one of them and not the other one? How do I make sure that you know I don't come back and see

a torn right? So that's where we're going next. And so we'll start off concurrency protocol. That'll be today's class uh all this week and a little bit next week and then next week we'll pick up on I should take it back curt is so important. It's the next two weeks and then after that we'll do a week of recovery management like how again how do you crash make sure you come back and everything's still there. I'm just trying to emphasize it like again these

these these things we're going to start talk about next are all throughout the rest the rest of the system sort of go back and revisit some of the things that we've talked about already and say how we then infuse the notion of transactions and correctness inside of them. Okay. [snorts] All right. So, what do we talk about now? Right. So, we we've been sort of been talking about these SQL queries so far in this store and we really sort of focusing on doing sort of not so much simple things, but the the scope of the

data that they're accessing or modifying is is sort of limited to like one query. like yeah I can do joins or subqueries in a single query but really when it comes time to like updating things and modifying things we've been focusing on sort of really simple operations like one one operation at a time. So now we need to expand our discussion and our vernacular to understand what it means to start doing more complex things inside of our database system. So here's a typical uh sort of application

somebody might want to build for like a bank right where I keep track of like how much money somebody has in their account. And so on the on the other side here where I'm showing this is the this is the the application code that someone would write to build a bank application against a database right whether it's in Python, PHP, Java, Rust, it doesn't matter like the high level concepts what we care about. So say I want to do a bank transfer, right? And so object I'm going to access

object A. Read object A. Say that's somebody somebody's bank account and I'm first going to read how much money I have in that account. So the application will get back now uh the balance of $100. Then I'm if I'm going to transfer $25, I got to make sure that this account has sufficient funds to do that transfer. So I'll have a client side check that says, you know, does this account have $25? If yes, then I'll go ahead and do the payment to some other account like think

VMO, Cash App, whatever, doesn't matter, right? I'm going to pay $25 to somebody to somebody other account, but then now I need to deduct $25 from account A, right? To take the $25 out. And then now I have this new balance of $75. I want to I want to write this back now to the database system to now reflect that I've transferred $25 out of this account and send it to somebody else. Right? Pretty straightforward. So the question we're try to deal with today is what happens if the database

system crashes before I update the balance. So I've sent the $25 put in another account and then now I crash when I come back. What should what should be in the bank account? Right? my account and then also whoever I paid, how much should be in their account, right? Another example is say run the same same sort of application code again, but this time for whatever reason you and your best friend or your roommate share bank accounts and you both want to pay somebody $25 at exact same time. So on

the website on the on the system uh in the application side, you're going to run the exact same code, but it's going to run ex at exactly the same time. So we're going to have sort of two threads or two two two instances of this application logic running at the same time either on the same machine, different machine, it doesn't matter, right? Because the the the database is keeping track of how much money is there. So they're going to do all the same steps. Go get the current balance.

We have $100. Check to see that at least we have $25 to send it. Yes, we do. Then go ahead and pay that $25. Now update the the bank account with the new balance, $75. and then now try to write this new balance back to the data system. And obviously this would be bad because if if we allow this to happen, whatever, you know, they're both trying to update with $75, but they both sent out $25. So the real account balance should be $50. But if I let them overwrite each other, then I'm ending up

with uh incorrect state of of the database. Right? This this is this is talking about concurrent access. There's there are two main issues we care about. if we crash and and come back, how do we make sure that the the state of the Davis is what we expect to see? Uh and then how do we handle two transactions, two or more transactions trying to update the same thing at the same time. And so this is what we'll we focus on today when we talk about protocols. It's the mechanisms the data system is going to

implement to prevent all these problems from occurring. All right, so let's think of a really easy system we could use to solve this, right? Say that we have in our database system we only have one worker that can only execute one query or one transaction at a time. Let's say one transaction. So that means that when the application sends requests uh we even though there may be multiple multiple requests it's only going to execute one of them at a time. Think think of a single queue.

And then now when a transaction begins start begins to start updating the database instead of overwriting existing data that we have in our pages we're instead going to make copy of those pages. Think of again slotted page architecture. We're making a copy of those pages and then we're going to apply all our updates to those pages and then when it comes time to commit we just we then just flip some internal mechanism like a the page directory to say here's the new version the latest information about

those two. If the transaction fails or we crash then when we come back and those pages they were from the uncommitted transaction we just ignore them and clean them up. So, is this proposal correct? Will this guarantee that I don't have the two problems I had before where if I crash halfway through the transaction, I end up with invalid database state. And does this also prevent me from having two transactions, two or more transactions updating the same record at the same time? >> Yes. What? Yes, it is correct.

>> Is it safe? Except for like when you write little part when you write this like you're happy with your copy and you go >> a statement is uh when a transaction commits that's the happy part. When you're happy that you're you made your changes and you go ahead and commit. You're saying there's a there's a small uh sort of small window where you may not be able to flip over that and say you've successfully completed the transaction. Well, like if you're

currently writing to dis and then now it breaks like you're writ when you're currently writing to disc we made a copy of it, right? So we we're updating the copy, not the original. >> Yeah, but you have to save your copy back. >> The statement is you have to save the copy on the back of the original. What if we instead just update a single page that says here's the latest version of those pages >> and we can do that atomically. >> Okay, it works meaning it's safe and

correct. >> Who agrees with that? It's safe. Okay. Who agrees that it's correct? All right. For those who don't think it's safe or correct, do you think it's not safe or correct or you just don't know? It's okay to not know. Who here says this is a terrible? Sorry. Who says here this is not correct and or not safe? Okay. Well, you're all you're all correct. This is this is this is correct and safe. Do we think it's performant? No. Why? copy everything.

>> Well, yeah. So, so in this case here, yes, we're copying the entire database. You could be more fine grain. Say if I update two pages, I update those two pages, right? You can do that. >> You said you don't have concurrency. Correct. Yes. That in this in this world, you can only up allow one transaction to update the database at a time because you because there's that little piece at the end where you flip and say, here's the new pages that need to be done atomically, and it can only

allow one transaction to do that at a time. So, yes. So this technique here is called shadow paging and we'll cover it in more detail. This is basically what IBM did or not basically it is what IBM invented in the 1970s when they invented the so the early concept of transactions like Jim Gray the guy we we talked about before he won the touring award in the 90s for all of this this transactional stuff that we'll talk about here. This is what they did in the 70s. They abandoned it later on because of its

performance reasons which we'll we'll cover uh more detail in the next two classes or so. But this would work. This is kind of what SQL light does to if you switch on they have a special mode you can switch to shadow paging. They'll basically do this, right? But as we said like if you only allow one transaction run at the same time then you're you're sort of not getting the full parallelism you you want to have in your database system. So what we really want to do and what the next couple lectures are trying to

solve is how do we allow for multiple transactions to run at the same time simultaneously and interact with the database either reading or writing with it at the same time. I mean it's sort of obvious why you want to do this right. We want to take advantage of all the additional parallelism we have in modern hardware like more CPU cores but we'll eventually we're talking about single node systems now but we'll talk about distributed bases in a second. Same idea applies. If I want to go multiple go

across multiple nodes, I that that'll give me better parallels and better scalability and it'll appear to the end users that the data system is more responsive because I'm not submitting a transaction then waiting, you know, some maybe a second for whatever transaction that was queued up in front of me to finish. I may have to still do that in some cases and I may end up aborting if if I try to write something that somebody else has already wrote to. But we we'll cover what that means in a

second. But in general, this this allows to route allows to get the better performance. uh for for for in our system because we're taking more advantage of the of the um of of the hardware that's available to us. But as I was sort of saying before, we we it's great to be fast, but we also want to be correct. And actually in database systems, usually you want to care about correctness first and then performance later because it's often times very hard to build a fast system and then go try to graft make it correct

later on. You're better off building a correct system first and then figuring out how to optimize it without relaxing those correctness guarantees. And this is super hard. There was a bug found in Postgress's implementation of this probably two or three years ago. Postgress has been around since the 80s since before most you guys were born and they're still finding you know errors in in in these protocols is super hard to do. Fairness. We'll talk about a little bit in we talk about two-phase locking

uh next class. But this is giving the you know making sure that no one transaction or no one application is starved out indefinitely if you're trying to get access to your your to the data. But again we'll cover that when when we talk about how to break deadlocks. Uh next class. All right. So what we're trying to do here is we're trying to allow for an arbitrary interle of operations against the database. So read and write operations. Um but during this process while a transaction is running there may

be moments in time where the the database is actually inconsistent means that the data is actually incorrect because you kind of have to be can make apply some changes right but that's okay as long as those uh inconsistencies don't persist after a transaction commits or after a transaction is aborted because of restart right those things are bad that's what we're trying to avoid but during transaction execution like going Back to my example here, right? When I took $25 out of this

bank account, ignoring the the running in parallel, and then before I I sent $25 to somebody else and then I before I took out the $25 in my account, there's technically an extra $25 floating around in the system, right? We're talking nanconds here potentially. But in that case here, it's technically it's incorrect because there's $25 more than it actually should be. But that's okay, right? because we have to do that because we can't just do magically, you know, apply changes atomically in one

instruction at the level we're talking about here. So that's what I mean by the temporary stuff that it's it's it's okay, but we have to make sure we don't let things uh persist forever. [snorts] The other important thing to understand too when we talk about transactions here is that we only care about we being the data system, we only care about what's in our purview of control in our data system. So what I mean by that is we can only handle the read and write operations on data that we manage that

we have control over. If the application does other stuff like send a confirmation email or like launch a missile in the middle of a transaction and then our transaction aborts needs to roll back. We can't roll back that email roll back that missile right because the data system not yet at least doesn't control uh everything in the world. So anything outside the scope of a transaction the readwrite operations we're talking about in the data set we manage right we we can't revert those

things. So there may be inconsistencies in the real world but the data doesn't know about it doesn't care about it. Okay. All right. So in order to understand we got to start defining what we mean by you know database and objects and what these transactions are actually doing. So for today's class, we're going to simplify the problem and not talk about tupils or pages or indexes or rows, anything like that. We're only going to deal with abstract objects. We'll give names ABCD. It could be a tupole, could

be a table, could be a database. It doesn't matter. All the protocol stuff we'll talk about here today and and going forward will still work in this, you know, with this sort of uh in, you know, this sort of abstract notation. >> [snorts] >> The other third important thing to understand is that we're going to assume for this class today's lecture that the database is going to be fixed size. Meaning all the objects that we care about ABCD whatever they're going to

exist before transaction starts and they're still going to exist after the transaction starts. We're not worried about inserts. We're not worried about deletes. Those complicate things and we we'll have to handle that next class. Today's class we're not worried which assume that these objects are always there. We can update them. We can read them but we can't delete or insert new ones. So now we're going to define transactions as a sequence of read and write operations on these database

objects. So I can read a or I can write a. And we'll define that when a transaction starts when it invokes begin, right? That's in the SQL syntax. I think sometimes some systems might support start. Um but begin usually what people use. And then we'll say that a transaction finishes either when they call commit or roll back or abort. Right? Roll back and abort are the same thing that I know you you can do in SQL for either one. Commit means like I save all my changes, apply them to the

database. And roll back says undo anything any rights that I've done and make it as if I I didn't do anything. Okay. So the the notion of correctness we're going to have for our for our transactions are defined by the acronym ACID. Who here here has heard acid before? All right, almost half. Perfect. So now we're going to go more detail what each of these are. So ACID stands for atomicity, consistency, isolation, durability, right? And in full disclosure, atomicity and isolation and

durability. These will be easy for us to understand today. We're going to focus mostly on isolation. Consistency is kind of a a weird one. um it'll make more sense when we talk about distributed systems um but we we'll cover it as we go along. So atity just means that for a given transaction all the operations that that that that a transaction invokes or executes either they're all going to occur or none of them are going to occur. So I can't have any any partial transactions, right? So you can

think of this as like simp simplified. It's all or nothing. [snorts] Consistency means that it has to do with like correctness. So like if the database is currently consistent or correct and my transaction only does consistent things, then when a transaction commits, my database is guaranteed to be consistent. That doesn't mean anything like probably doesn't mean anything to you guys either, right? Um again in in when it's a single node system it's it's kind of hard to to discuss but like with

distributed system another way I think about this is if I write to a data object a on this node here and I go to commit I can immediately reflect those changes on all other copies of the data on other nodes >> immediately they say it's physically impossible. Now, depends on who's tracking. Again, we'll cover that later. All right. Isolation is the idea that a that a transaction is going to execute as if it has the complete access or uh is the only transaction executing at that given time on the database system.

Meaning it can't see reason can't see rights from other transactions at the same time because you wouldn't see that if you were truly isolated. And the last one, durability just means that if my transaction commits, then I'm guaranteed that my changes will survive no matter no matter whether like the machine catches on fire or another, you know, the system crashes, the OS crashes, right? Obviously, the machine catches on fire and your disc melt like then you potentially don't get anything.

But the way you handle that is through replication. Now you're talking about distributed systems. And then again, we'll cover that later, right? I me and Harry hand trying to like do baby steps into this to understand how we're actually going to do this on a single node and then we'll expand upon expand on on a on a multi-node system. So again, admissacy isolation durability pretty easy to understand. The German guy in the 1980s that that sort of coined this moniker acid, right? He kind

of shoehorned consistency in there because like he was trying to just make it sound nice like acid rather than aid. Um and then he was trying to like make a joke against his wife. This is the story goes I've never met the guy so I don't know that his wife didn't like sugar and sweets so he called her an acid woman. So that's why he got he had to get the C in there to make it all work right. Uh but again this again we won't talk about much today's class or when we talk about

the current protocols but it'll make more sense when we talk about distributed systems. [snorts] All right so today's class we're going to go through each of these concepts one by one and again we'll focus mostly on isolation because that's going to be the most important concept in all this. [snorts] All right so for the case ad transactions as I said before we don't want to allow partial partial transactions. So there's only two possible outcomes when a when an application starts a transaction in our

database system. It's either going to commit and have all its changes apply to the database or it's going to abort and rolled back uh and have all its changes reversed. So as as if it didn't even execute at all. And one important concept that we'll focus more on in next class is the the this roll back process could either be initiated by the application itself like the application say I don't like what I'm doing. abort my transaction or the database system can say I don't like what you're doing

I'm going to make you stop and abort your transaction and roll you back and in your application code which is again outside the database system your application code has to be able to handle that so if you start a transaction in your application you have to be you know catch the exception that you may get aborted and it's up to you for you to decide whether you want to retry it or not >> the question is can a single query abort sure why not >> okay >> yeah let me think about that's true or

not. Yeah, you could you could say uh [snorts] uh oh, now I'm getting the weeds. So, it depends on CO protocol. Uh you could have it like try to update something that another transaction tries to update at the same time. Uh and then therefore you block and wait and then you might time out and get aborted, right? Well, we we'll do we do examples of that and then it depends on the isolation level. We'll cover that next class. Right? It gets complicated [snorts] but in general yeah it could a

single statement transaction is still a transaction. >> So implicitly >> the statement is uh the statement is implicitly every query is a transaction. Yes. So when you open up Postgress today and you write a query uh it's going to run it's going to technically runs begin commit around it even though it runs that one query. Yes. [snorts] It's called autocommit. You can turn that off. So you can do update update update and without calling begin and it creates a new transaction but you have

to call commit or roll back at the end. I admit I love transactions. They're like super awesome. They're super hard. Uh so I get excited. That's why I'm like riffing on everything he's asking about because like we can give demos and give we it's all awesome. It's great and it's really hard too. Um even though it's it's an old topic. [snorts] Okay. So again, so I said it's the data system guarantees to the application server that your transactions will be atomic.

So either everything's going to execute or nothing's going to execute. So there's two highle ways we're going to be able to provide this this guarantee. The first is going to be through logging and this is the most common approach that most systems use. And it's challenging because the term log has a bunch of different technical name or usage in in data systems, right? uh you you think of like a debug log, you know, just printing out printf statements. Uh we saw this before with

the log structure merge tree. It's kind of the same idea, but it's basically just a record in a ledger of the ordered sort of an ordering of here's all the operations that a data that a transactions made applied to the database system. And we can either store this as the as in a separate file like a redhead log file which we'll cover in a few weeks. Uh or we could actually just have the database itself be like the log merry like that have that be the log we're using to figure out what

transactions actually did. So in this log we can keep track of all the the actions that that occurred and also redo information and undo information. So undo information would be like how to reverse the change that they applied and the redo would be how to reapply reapply the change and we're actually going to going to end up needing both of them and we'll have to maintain this undo log in memory as transactions are making changes and then we'll see this in a few weeks but in our bufferable manager we

we're going to have to make sure that when we flush out a dirty page that's been modified by transaction we got to make sure the log record that corresponds to what whatever made that page dirty that's got to be get get written to disk first before the page that got modified gets written to disk. And that that simple ordering is going to guarantee that we can crash and and and come back and restore the state of the database correctly. Right? There's those flight recorders or black boxes in in in airplanes that

keeps track of like here's all the things that were occurring in my system right before the crash. They've recovered that and figure out why the plane failed. Same thing in our database system. It's the blackbox recorder that keeps track of here's all the changes that that occurring. Some of them have been written a disk. Some might be in memory but at least when we crash come back we can look inside that and figure out what was going on to put the database back in in the correct state.

>> Yes. >> The question is question is what are we logging? >> Yeah. >> And the choices are am I recording like a snapshot of the record like the tupal itself or am I recording like what was the change? It depends on what how you implement it. >> The answer is both. You can do both. operations like the only >> so his question is um if I'm recording the aggregation like as an update query or um >> the same as if if I say I do a select query get an aggregation and then I

update some other record with the corresponding aggregation. So the log will be ordered such that when you recover it, you can go back to the previous state of the database and replay that transaction. And I actually don't care about the essentially I don't care about the aggregation. I only care about what's the final computation that I put in the database. As long as that occurs in the same order the first time it ran, then I'm okay. So that's getting that's called physiological logging

where I'm recording the actual changes like the bite level changes like a diff and git. You can do logical logging where it's actually the the query itself gets logged and then you reexecute the query. So the qu the qu the query took you know an hour to run the first time when you recover the log it takes an hour to run again. But sometimes that's okay because if I'm doing real fast things it's actually faster for me. So like we'll get to that in like three weeks but like the answer is yes. This

thing is being ordered and with all the changes that are getting getting made so that if I crash and come back I just replay the exact same order and I am guaranteed to get back in the correct database state. All right. So, we want to do this for obviously for for efficiency reasons in some cases because it'll be it'll be faster for us to write a sequential log out to disk rather than random IO for pages. That's the same argument we saw with the the the the log structure merge tree architecture versus like the heap

files or the slotted pages. But again, sometimes people also keep track of keep these these logs around forever or at least seven years. Like if you're a financial firm, you got to keep track of every transaction that everyone's ever made for seven years if you ever get uh audited by the regulators. And so this this log information can use for that as well. What am I recording my log? Is it the actual operations I did or like the bite level changes? It depends. >> For undo, undo, you'd have to you'd have

to record what the previous value was because, you know, if it's like a um if you're recording like update update value plus one, I have to know what the previous value was. Again, like depending on how you're you're you're replaying the log, you may need that previous value. may may not we're getting way ahead ourselves but snapshots is the way to handle your problem if you don't have the undo just go back to the previous version and replay in the same order again getting

way ahead of ourselves but you guys are again you're understanding like this thing can be replayed so we can put the days back in the same state the other technique is what we already talked about at the beginning the the shadow paging again this is where you make copies of pages uh to allow the transactions to make those make you know update those these those copies instead of the original versions and then when go commit. You just flip pointers and say here's now the the latest version of

the pages. Yes. In the back. >> Yes. >> That the the front head would be expensive. Is that all right? So her statement is uh can I briefly discuss like what's the run what's the performance of these two approaches and there's two notions of performance there is normal operations where I'm running transactions and then there's if I crash and recover how long does that take most people most most places care about the the normal operations you say oh my database is not going to crash that

often so I want to run as fast as I can and then yeah if I crash then I'll I'll I'll pay that penalty. So the the write ahead log approach is actually faster at runtime for normal operations because I can just append to a log and write that out sequentially. Right now when I crash come back depending on how I what I'm storing my log I got to replay it and that could take hours potentially worst case scenario days right where in the case of shadow paging it's going to be slower at runtime because I got to make

a copy of the page and and then apply my changes and then somehow you know update some some pointer to point to the new pages but when I crash come back it's super fast because I just ignore all my shadow pages because those transactions didn't commit and I come back and my database is instantly in the correct state. So again, most most systems are going to care about the their normal operations and choose a red head log approach. There's one system in the 1970s, I forget the name of it. Um it was

actually built uh by the Puerto Rican power company and it was like I don't know the 70s in Puerto Rico. They they the infrastructure was not that great. Although it's not much better now, but still. Um so they had a database system. they were sort of keeping track of like the you know the the usage of various customers and because they were having all these power outages that they chose a shadow paging approach because you know three times of the day that this the power would go out the data would

crash and you don't want to spend you know an hour waiting for the system to come back online the data system come back online uh after a power outage because it might crash again so they chose shadow paging because when they would crash which is unpredictable when they came back they could have instantly available So they were choosing slower runtime performance in exchange for faster recovery. But most most people are going to choose the opposite. So the very few systems do this today. Again system IBM did this on system R

1970s but when they built DB2 uh they switched to redhead log the the previous slide. Uh probably one of the most famous ones doing this is LMDB. Uh and this is he's the opposite of me like he loves MAP and he loves shadow paging and that's what he uses. Uh I think CouchB still does this. There was an early key value store called Tokyo Cabinet from I don't know 10 years ago that was doing this but in general like I guess we said many times you don't want to do this right head logging is always going to be

superior choice uh and there's tricks to make the recovery actually go faster depends on how how much you want to take snapshots and so forth like in general the right head logging is going to be the superior approach >> yes and yes I'm I'm I'm leaking I'm leaking ideas coming ahead. Yes. Um I should just say logging but in actuality we call this write ahead log. So the idea is you're writing the changes you make to the days to the log first then you update the actual data

base itself. That's the right loging. Yes. >> What happens when you log? The question is what happens if you write to the log that gets written to disk and then before the the changes to the the actual data gets get well if you crash and come back you replay the log and you come back and you you want to roll back and then >> you can't roll back if you say commit all right so this is another question too we got to understand so if my application tells my data I want to go commit

>> I may crash before I get the acknowledgement that my transaction committed and that's Okay, so meaning like I you tell me to commit, I commit your transaction and then now I'm about to send you a message. Hey, I got it. Good job. Right, but then I crash before you get that message. That transaction is still committed >> and it's your job to go figure out whether actually committed or not. We can't we can't you know we the the data system >> and that's still correct,

>> right? >> So So it only writes starts writing the log after you tell it. >> Uh we're getting ahead of ourselves. Uh some systems will keep everything in memory. Some systems will actually write things along. You want to write things sorry write write the log out to disk. You want to write it out to disk because that that means if like if I have if I need to update a billion pages but I I only keep a 100 in memory then the write ahead log is how I'm going to be able to

handle that. If I have to keep everything in memory then I can't do can't keep everything in memory. So it's okay for me to write the log out to disk before I finish or commits. But as soon as I I'm told commit as soon as on on disk it lands a commit message in the log that transaction is committed. >> Okay. But then it's possible that like in the middle logs. Yes. >> Yes. the changes to the data. >> Yeah. >> No. So the statement is it may be the case where my transaction is updating

the database and I'm writing to this log and some of those log records are getting written to disk and you haven't told me to commit yet, right? So I haven't the the application hasn't told me to commit and then I crash. >> Correct. The log will log can help us do that. >> The log has data that you didn't actually write, >> right? So there's the log and then there's the data. >> The log tells me what I what I was trying to do to the data. So when I

crash and come back, I go look in the data and say, did I actually make those changes? Yes or no? And if I did and they shouldn't be there, I have to roll them back. >> Yeah. This gets very hard. It's very complicated. The answer is yes. We'll spend whole one whole lecture exactly that problem. >> Yes. Because then you got to worry about like my log grows forever, right? I don't want to I don't want to run my data for five years and then crash and have to replay the log for five years.

So what do you do? You take checkpoints or snapshots so I can truncate how far back in the log I got to go. But what happens if I have a transaction started, I take a checkpoint and then the transaction finishes and now it spans checkpoints. How do I handle that? How long? The statement is again we're getting ahead of our statement is and I like this statement is well just don't take checkpoints while transactions are running. My checkpoint takes say half an hour. Do you want my website to be down

for half an hour? No. Right. And in the financial world those guys are paranoid. They take checkpoints every five minutes. So we'll talk about how do you allow transactions to keep running while I'm taking checkpoints. are called fuzzy checkpoints. It's hard. It's awesome. Yeah. Uh and there's there's there's this book or sorry, not a book. There's a this there's this the [snorts] spent a whole class on the the algorithm is called Aries. Uh it's developed by IBM in the

early 90s. It's 75 pages. It's it's like that's the bible on how to make sure your database is is fail safe on a single node. Again, if the machine catches on fire, you you're screwed there. Then you use Paxos as a raft whatever to span things out across multiple nodes. We'll get there. We'll get there. Okay. Don't do the shadow bing. All right. [snorts] Consistency this thing. Right. So again we're trying to say our database is trying to model the real world. So we

want to make sure that we don't allow for for transa we don't allow transactions to make changes that would violate you know parameters or aspects of the real world. So for example, if I have a database of of keeping track of everyone's age like as a single integer, I don't want nobody can be a negative age, right? So I want my data system to to not allow [clears throat] that. And therefore, if a transaction tries to update the you know someone's age record to say now they're negative 100 years

old, the data system would not should not allow that because that would be an inconsistent state of the database. Right? So this is not something the data system can do do for you automatically. doesn't know what it means for for someone to be a negative age or it's just storing integers. So these constraints are things that the the application has to tell us either through like the add constraints or like when you create the table you can call it check not null is another obvious one right so these are all the it has to be

told these constraints ahead of time and the data system if it wants to be consistent has to enforce them to make sure that no transaction actually can update the database in an invalid way right so you may have heard the term eventual consistency Right? This is when we're getting ahead of ourselves a little bit, but this is when we start talking about multiple nodes like distributed systems. So vual consistency means that if I have a copy of a data that's replicated on say two machines and so when my transaction

modifies something on one machine and I commit that change should be immediately reflected on the the the other machine if I want to have you know consistency guarantees. So that means if I commit here and I immediately try to read that same record on another machine, I should see my own right. Eventual consistency basically says well well this is hard to do. So we'll have two copies of the data on two machines and when I update the one machine here I'll eventually update the other one. So

there's a window a small window where I may do a commit on this node then go try to read that same record on another node and my change hasn't been propagated yet. So therefore, I see the older version, right? This is what people did in the uh this was the hot thing out of Google in the 2000s. Um but we'll talk about this end in the class. Like they basically said, "Oh, that was actually a mistake." Uh because now you have a bunch of JavaScript programmers trying to reason

about inconsistent incorrect data and that's never that's never good, right? So most of the modern transactional systems don't do this. Uh we'll cover this briefly and see how to not do it uh later in in the semester in lecture 23. [snorts] What is what >> uh integrity constraint sorry right like not null is an integrity constraint. Check that no age is is greater no age is less than zero. Right? Those are integrity constraints. Thank you. I shed it out. All right. All right. So, the main one I

want to talk about is isolation transactions. And again, this this means that when application submits queries, sorry, submits transactions to the to the database system, they're going to assume that they're running by themsel. So, they're not going to see weird intermediate states from from from other transactions might define the database, right? It's going to it's going to be as if it's running in in serial order. And this is this is a good thing because this is a way easier programming model

for your rando application developer to to reason about, right? Think of like >> [clears throat] >> JavaScript programmers, right? Uh like you don't want them to start thinking about, okay, what if I update this and another guy updates the same thing at the same time? How do I handle this? If you just assume they're going to run in serial order, then you don't you it's as if you're running on a box by yourself, right? But as we've already said, we want to be able to interle these these

these operations from these transactions at the same time so that you know we get the better parallelism and get the better performance. But we still need to make sure this that they're going to run as if they were running one at a time even though they're not. So this is what the concern protocol is going to provide for us in addition to the logging and all the other stuff. sort of the whole the whole big picture. But this is basically the the coordination mechanism inside of our data system that we're going to use to

figure out what transaction can run at what time. What data are they allowed to read and write? And then when they go to commit, are they allowed to do that or not, right? There's other things like we'll talk about next class. How to handle deadlocks or either block, you know, breaking them when they occur or prevent them from occurring. That's next class, right? Well, in in general, there's be basically two approaches to this, right? Which I I just sort of said, right? There's be pessimistic and optimistic

concial protocols. Pessimistic says that I think sorry, I'm assume you're going to have conflicts with other transactions. So, I'm going to prevent you from doing certain things to avoid avoid these conflicts, right? Trying to stop you from doing something something wrong ahead of time. Optimistic assumes that the conflicts are rare, meaning two guys trying to two transactions trying to read and write to the data at the same time. Same data at the same time. So, I'm gonna allow you to do whatever

you want, but then when you go to commit, I'll go figure out what you actually did and go go to clean things up. [snorts] All right. So, let's look look let's look at an example here. What of of how can you allow this interle and what it mean? What does it mean for things to be correct? A correct interle. So, [snorts] again, same we're doing same bank account application. Uh we have two accounts A and B and each one has has a $1,000 in it. So transaction T1 wants to take $100 out of A's account and put it

into B's account. And at the same time, we have another transaction T2 that wants to compute 6% interest on the accounts and and you know give them a bump in the money, right? [snorts] So we we want to see how can we intersections at the same time to improve prove the performance of the system reduce the total amount of time it takes to execute them. So the first thing we understand is what are the possible outcomes we could have for interle these these these two transactions here right the answer is a

bunch right they're not doing that much there's only two transactions there only two objects so it's not you know it's not infinite right but for this application the thing we care about at the end is that there's no money missing and there's no extra money that shouldn't be there so an easy way to think about it is if I just take the the the two accounts they both have $1,000. So I end up add them together I get $2,000 and I compute 1% interest on or take six% interest on them. The final

state of the database the total amount of money I should have in my database should be 2120. So an important thing to understand in in this this world of database systems at least what we're talking about here today that it doesn't matter whether T1 is submitted first by the application and then T2. We're allowed to execute them in any order that we want. So the the the order of their arrival on the box doesn't matter. We can still order them, you know, in any way we want to try to get the the best performance.

There's a if you care about those things, that's called strict consistency or uh external consistency. Very few systems support that. Google Spanner is probably the most famous one that Google Spanner will guarantee that if if the application one application spits T1 and then like a half a millisecond later another application spits T2 it'll guarantee that T1 commits before T2 simplify our problem today we're allowed to we're not going to guarantee that we can still reorder them [snorts]

but the outcome again we want in order to get make sure that we have this 2120 number at the end is that whatever interle we come up with we want to be as if they executed in serial order, meaning one after another. So that means that there's only two database states. Either I run T1 first followed by T2 or run T2 followed by T1, right? And I may end up with different values for for the accounts for A and B. But again, if I just add the total amount for each of them after the transactions committed, I still end up

with 2120. So either one is correct no matter how the transactions are submitted by the application. That's a different notion than maybe think about correctness if you're running on like you know single node parallel system like strict memory orderings right in this case here the data system is given freedom to reorder this anyway it wants as long as it is appears as if the transactions executed one after another right so again the two possible serial orderings are T1 executes followed by T2

or T2 executes first followed by T1 and again if I just look at the the final outcome of the the state of objects A and When I add them together, it's always going to be 2120. >> The question is what? Sorry again. >> The question is how would I determine this algorith algorithmically so that would be the protocol right? So today's class we're talk about just identifying whether the ordering is correct or not. Next class will be how do we enforce that? How do we make sure that doesn't

happen? So again, for for this class, we're assuming that we're given the queries ahead of time. Sorry, the operations ahead of time and we know so we have the schedule ahead of time. So we're not worried about a transaction T3 showing up at this this example here in the back. Yes. >> The question is, wouldn't there exist some kind of requirement or criteria that would be the same across all sequential orderings? Yes. So, uh, her point is that I'm showing I'm showing this example here that I'm

saying a plus b equals 2120 and I'm saying that's the we're using that to determine is the ordering correct. I'm just using that as an illustration in this example. Right? The things you would sort of really care about is like the values in the objects themselves, right? And then the we'll see that when we look at what the operations are actually doing inside the data system, that's how we're going to end up determining whether if the ordering is correct or not. For illustration purposes, I'm saying to

make it more intuitive, a plus b equals 2120. And you can see for the two zero orderings, you always end up with that, right? Yeah. That notion of higher the higher level notion of correctness. No, no one you can't assume someone's going to give you that. >> Yes. to rephrase what you're saying. Basically, what I'm trying to say is that I want to interle these operations in these transactions and I want the end state of the database to be equivalent to some serial ordering of those

transactions. But there may be multiple serial orderings and I actually don't care which one I end up with long as there's at least one of them. So what would be a system that is not let me so let me examples uh the question so the question is going to be like what's an example of a system that can't guarantee these things a lot of them so so let me go through serializability and then all right uh but I'll just say straight up like like when we talk about isolation levels you

say basically I want to guarantee For example, my my transactions end up equivalent to a serial ordering. Some systems will lie to you and say, "Yeah, I'll do that for you." When they actually don't do it. Oracle does this. Oracle say, "I want I want my transaction to be serializable." You actually get a lower level than serializable, right? And in Postgresses, theirs was broken for for a few years and someone fixed it two or three years ago. This is super hard. All right. So, let's look at

interle a good example. So, why would an interle occur again? So say like you know the the transaction tries to go fetch get data in a page and it's not in your buffer pool. You got to stall that transaction while you go to the disk and go get it. And meanwhile the DS is going to decide I'm going to let somebody something else run. So let's say T1 starts it read does takes the $100 out of A and then it stalls because they have to go to disk and then T2 is allowed to start. A computes the

interest on A but then it stalls because it's it's waiting for something too save the same page to get to read B. So then T1 can start again, puts the $100 back in B, T then commits, and then T2 starts running and then can update uh compute the interest on B. Right? So in this case here, even though I'm interleing T1 and T2, it's equivalent to a serial ordering of T1 followed by T2, right? And the key thing to point out is like the operations on A and B are always happening on T1 first before T T2,

right? And again just using this as a simple illustrator trick you end up with the same the same state. A bad leaving would look like this where T1 starts it gets it gets paused or stalled for whatever reason. T2 starts. All right. So T1 takes $100 at A. T2 then computes the interest on A then computes the interest on B and then commits and then T1 goes and adds $100 back to to B. Right? So when we look at the sum total value of the two accounts, we're missing $6 because we computed interest on A while this $100 in was

taken out of A but before it was putting in B. Right? So this is what we're trying to avoid. We're trying to avoid ending up with a a state of the database for our objects that are it's not equivalent to any any serial ordering. And again, for two transactions, it's either T1 T2 or T2 T1. But think of like if I have a million transactions, how how would I come up with bad ordering, right? So as humans again in examples here, I'm just showing like a you know a equals a minus 100, right? I'm just showing this.

It's pretty easy for us to understand what's actually going on. This is actually not what the database sees. The database sees this instead. Again, we said all we have are read and write operations on single objects. The JSON doesn't know again the high level meaning of what you're trying to do. It just knows whether you're trying to read or write to to an object. So again, in this example here, it's pretty easy for us to look at and say, "Okay, well, this is bad, right? And I

compute the sum and I see I'm off." But how can we actually do this for real? And so we want to determine that we have a correct ordering or schedule for our transactions if we can prove that it's equivalent to one of those serial orderings that that might exist. All right. So what does it mean to be equivalent? What's a serial order or serial schedule? So the serial schedule we've already talked about just means that the transactions are executing one after another, right? And then we're

going to say that two schedules of these transactions are equivalent if they if the end state of the database is going to be the same as if it was the you know as if it was exited by the other schedule. So I can take any arbitrary interle of a transaction uh of the transactions and then come another arbitrary inner leaving of the transactions and if the end state of the database is the same then we say those two schedules are equivalent even though the interle might be different. And then now I've already said this

before again I'm leaking terms ahead of time but we're going to say that this notion that a schedule is serializable I if that it is doing an interle but the the the outcome of the database is equivalent to some serial ordering of of those transactions. Right? So this is not as maybe again not as intuitive maybe as you understand computing and and and transactions and other other areas right but the reason why we're going to allow this this this interle to occur and we only care about

is it equivalent to any possible ordering or serial ordering is that it gives the data more freedom to identify better more opportunities for parallelism to get better performance. If I can only execute transactions in the exactly the same order that you submit them without interleing things, then I'm just ending up with a single threaded queue that we said before, right? But if I can interle them and have different notions of correctness, then that's okay. Then that that makes our lives a lot easier.

All right. So now we got to say how do we how do we identify whether they're actually equivalent or not? And I'll say what we're going to talk about here is in this world we're assuming that the database is fixed size. We have the objects all ahead of time. And we're going to assume that we have all of the operations that each transaction wants to do ahead of time. In most systems you don't have that, right? Most systems you don't you know are not fixed size. They're not immutable. So

you can't allow insert and deletes. But also most systems don't have all the schedules of the transactions ahead of time. So that's what the next class will be. How do I handle when how do I handle the case where transactions are submitting queries and I don't know I don't know what the next query is going to be for this class here. We're assuming that we have thing ahead of time. So we have to understand what does it mean for transactions to have conflicting operations in in their their

schedules. So we're going to find a conflict to occur is if there's two operations that are that are in both two separate transactions and they're either trying to they're trying to do something on the same object and at least one of them is going to be a right operation. So the thing we're trying to avoid are now called anomalies. These problem these are the problems that can occur if you're not executing things in serial ordering. So we want to identify the anomalies that can can occur so that

when we start interleing transactions we avoid these problems because if we we have one of these problems then we know that it's actually not going to be equivalent to a serial ordering and therefore our schedule is not serializable. So we're going to go through the three basic ones today. Uh write read or sorry read write read and write right. Why no read conflicts? Yeah, because who cares if whether if you and I read the same thing, who cares, right? There's actually two other anomalies

that we're not going to talk about today, but we'll cover in uh in upcoming weeks called phantom reads and write skew. Phantom reads of when they do scans. If I scan a range of data and then someone inserts something or deletes something within that range and I do that scan again and now the thing I saw before is gone and now I get in, you know, in incorrect aggregation or whatever I'm trying to compute. That's called a phantom. Again, we'll cover that next next next class how to handle that. And there's

another anomaly called right skew. This one a bit more complicated. This one we do multi- versioning. Uh this is if actions are trying to update the same database at the same time and they want to read what's in there and then update again like a like an aggregation or something else. Uh they may end up reading the the same database state but then end up have conflicting rights. It's not exactly the same as right skew. Again, it's a bit more nuanced. We'll cover this when we talk about

multi-verging in a few more lectures. But as I'm pointing out, there's there's more stuff here other than these three here. [snorts] All right. First one is is rewrite conflicts. We also call it unre repeatable reads. The basic idea here is that I'm trying to read something from the database in my transaction and then when I try to read it again in that same transaction, I get a different result. So transaction T1 starts, it reads reads $10 from object A. Then now T2 starts, it reads $10 from A, but then it writes

back $19. Then it goes commits. And then now T1 starts again. And when it reads A, it gets back $19. Right? If I was exiting these transactions in serial ordering, this could not occur. If I the first transaction would read $10 from A, when it reads A again, if it was running all by itself in serial order, then it should see $10 again, not 19. So, so we have to make sure we don't have this conflict. The next one is write read conflicts are also called dirty reads, right? So, T1 starts, does a read on A, then it writes

A back as $12, but then now T2 reads A and gets the update from that T1 made. So, sees the $12 that that that T1 put in. So, then it writes back, I don't know, $14, right? But then T1 aborts and rolls back. But T2 has already committed. Again, when we when you go commit, you're telling the outside world all the changes you made, they've all been applied. But again, if we were executing serial order, this couldn't occur because T2 should not see the update, should not be able to read the the the update that T1

made because T1 has not committed yet, right? So this we have to avoid this kind of conflict. >> So the question is why is this a conflict or what's what's the issue? is like if there's higher level semantics about what the read and writes actually are could this avoid this problem few more slides we'll get there yes but in this assume there's like again the all the know is read and rights so read a and say on the application code there says if my if my uh if my balance is more than more than

$10 then go put $2 in or something like that right so like it read something from a transaction that had not committed yet and if you're executing serial order it should not be able to see that That's what we care about. [snorts] >> Yes. >> First transaction. >> Say it is. Am I claiming that a transaction should not be able to read a an object from the database with a with an updated change if unless the transaction that made that change has committed? Yes. If they were executing

serial ordering. Yes. Yes. >> The question is what if a transaction committed in the middle of another transaction? >> Yeah, >> we just covered that. That's this >> that's the first one. Oh, sorry. That's the readr conflict. So I that's exactly what you said. I read a, I get $10. This guy puts $19 in it. I read it again, I get 19. I shouldn't see that. All right, last one is write write conflicts. This is also called loss updates. So I have two objects now, A

and B, that I care about. T1's going to write A, put $10 in. T2 is going to start. Doesn't care about what's in A now, right? It's not reading it, just writes it. So this is called a blind write. So I'm writing into A, putting $19 in. Then now I'm gonna write B and put Bob in. But then T1 comes along and it puts Alice into B. So my end state of the database in this example here is going to have $19 in A and Alice in B. And that's invalid, right? That's not if it was true serial

ordering, it would be either $10 in Alice or $19 and Bob, right? So you know, we want to avoid this problem. [snorts] All right. So this gets a little heavy here. Uh but let's we'll go through it. I think figuring out conflict setibility is is pretty straightforward. Viewability is is a bit more nuanced. Um so basically we want to say all right so now we have these schedules. We know what these conflicts are that can occur right ignoring phantoms andoring ignoring right skew. So how can we check

whether a arbitrary schedule is not going to have any of these things other than just us looking at them trying to trying to manually figure them out because that would be laborious to do and and it's not scalable. So there's now going to be two different notions of serializability. Remember serializable schedule means that it's equivalent to a some serial ordering transactions. But now there's other notions of correctness to say something's actually serializable. The first one is the most common one called

called conflict serializability and that's just figuring out where where you have conflicts between these transactions. There's another notion called view serializability which is if you understand the high level semantics of what the application actually wants to do with the data sort of what he was proposing where and maybe okay that you have conflicts because in the end it doesn't matter. So any system that's going to do transactions is going to give you conflicts and support serializable

transactions or serializable ordering is going to do conflict serializability even though they don't call it that that's implicitly what they mean. View serializability is a is a more complicated notion because you need you need to actually look in the application code or maybe even talk to the human which is the worst thing to do to ask them like what does it mean for things to be correct. There's even other notions of correctness and serializability we're not going to cover in this class and there's a whole sort

of a ven diagram we'll cover um but these these like conflictizability is the main one I'll show briefly because again you'll see how to sort of handle the one case that he brought up. [snorts] All right. So now we're going to say that two schedules are conflict equivalent if and only if they going to be involve the same operations on the same transactions, right? And we're going to be able to identify that the ordering of those operations on those objects will be occur in the same way.

So now we're going to say that a schedule is conflict serializable if it's conflict equivalent to some serious schedule that puts the Davis in the same state. So me sitting up here and looking at text and being hand wavy doesn't help. So let's look how we actually comput this in the real world. So we're going to comput what's called a dependency graph. I think Wikipedia might call them precedence graph. They're all the same thing where now we're basically going to

have a node in this graph for every single transaction that we have running in a schedule. And then we'll have an edge between those two nodes. If there's an operation that is in one transaction that that conflicts with another operation on another transaction and the other operation occurs later in the schedule. So the thing we care about if we end up with a graph that has no cycles then we know that our graph is is conflict serializable and therefore it's equivalent to some serial ordering. If

we have a cycle then we know that that it's not serializable. So we go to example here. So T1 is going to read A, write A, read B and write B. And T2 is going to do the exact same thing. So in the first case here, we we see have a write on A that occurs before a read the read on A in T2. Therefore, I'll have an edge from T1 to T2 that corresponds to this conflict here. Right? Likewise, I would have a right on B followed by a read on B. Right? So therefore, I have an edge going the other direction. So now I know I have a

cycle in my dependency graph and therefore I know I have this thing's not conflict centralizable. I'm not showing there's a right on A and a right on A. That would be another conflict. That would just be a redundant edge uh between T1 and T2. And same for the right on B and the right the two rightes on B's. So again, the issue here is that the the cycle in the graph basically is telling us there's a dependency between modifications that are being made by one transaction and the read write read or

write uh operations in another transaction and that they shouldn't be able to see those changes um or all the changes should go in one direction and not have cycles going back to the other direction. We can expand this out now for three transactions. So same thing we're doing reads on A and writes on A across T1, T2, T3. So we start off with a read on A that has a conflict with the right on A. Read on A and T1 has a conflict the right on A and T3. So an edge from T1 to T3. Then we have this right on A to a

read on A between T1 and T3 again. So we just have another edge there. Then the right on A and the right on A for between T1 T23. Again, another edge. Now we have this right on B to a read on B between T2 and T3. So we have edge in this direction. And then we have again the right on B and the read on B. The right on B and the right on B between T1 T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T2 and T3 T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T2 and T1. So we have same edge. So in this case here because we have no

cycles, we can say that this is conflict uh uh this is equivalent to a zero and execution of executing T2 followed by T1 followed by T3. Even though T1 called begin first before T2, right? The end state of the database will be equivalent to T2 actually running first followed by T1 followed by T3. And that's okay, right? T3 actually even commits before T1 does, right? But we're saying that T3 occurs in this logical view of of the ordering transactions occurs after T1 commits, even though physically it did

not. And that's okay. Does it make sense? Pretty cool, huh? [snorts] All right. So let's look at another one. So now we're we're we're have T1 doing the the the read on A, write on A, read on B, and write on B. And now I'm including the application logic. Instead of having A automatically update the database, I'm having the procedural code you would have in your application to like take A, take $10 out, and then transfer the $10 into B's account, right? And obviously

you have to read the account in order to know what the value to put into it. And then now you see also in T2 I'm computing some kind of sum which is adding up all the money that's that's in accounts A and B. And then I had this little return sum thing here. This is actually not valid SQL. I'm just trying to show you that after the transaction commits you you would report back whatever the sum is to to whoever sort. [snorts] So in this case here T1 does a write on A. That's going to have a conflict with

the the read on A in T2. So therefore we have an edge from T1 to T2. But then later on I have a read on B followed by the right on B. So T2 to T1. So then I have another edge going the other direction. So in this point here we know that it's again it's not conflictizable because we have a we have a cycle. But can we modify the application logic in T2 where we don't actually care about what the values actually are and then still produce the same correct result even though we have a conflict or have a

cycle in our graph. So, if I change from just getting the total amount that I have in my bank accounts to just counting the counting the number of bank accounts that have have zero dollars or more and the only thing I care about is reporting that count actually than the actual total amount that's in in the in the uh bank accounts. Then this is actually would be correct if I if I order them in this way. Right? So again, this is going back to that same point. If you understand what the application actually cares about

some higher level semantics where for this application or this transaction, I don't care about the total amount. I just care about counting the number of of accounts. Then if you have an interle like this, it's still considered correct. So this is what view serializability is. It's a broader more relaxed notion of correctness than conflict serializability, but it requires you to understand what the hell the application actually wants. And again, if you if you you either have to examine application code, which is

that's a nightmare, or you got to talk to a human and ask them what they actually mean, and that's that's the worst the worst, right? Because people don't know what the hell they're talking about. Uh so that's why no system can actually do this again. So rather than going through the the more formal semantics, let's look at an example, another example. So here I have two transactions, T2, T3, T2, T1, T2, T3. So T1's going to read on A and then write on A. And then T2 and T3 are just doing

again blind writes on A. It doesn't read with the values, just overwrites whatever is in there. So if I go through and generate my dependency graph using what we talked about before, right? You end up seeing that it sort of looks like this. And we clearly we have a cycle between T1 and T2. So in this case here, this is not conflict serializable because again there's a dependency between uh T2, right? T1 is is reading A, T2 is in writing it and then T1 is overwriting it as again. But if you look at the transaction,

who cares actually what happens at the, you know, in in in the while the transactions are running in this schedule here, the only thing I care about is that T3 writes whatever was in a last and does that blind write. So in this example here, this ordering is not conflict serializable, but is actually view serializable because it's equivalent to a serial ordering like this, right? I don't care that that you know that that T2 did overwrote something on on on A and then T1 overwrote that that

you know that wouldn't have happened in in if I was doing serial ordering but if my end state of the database is the only thing I care about is that A is written last by uh T3 and that's all that's all I care about. [snorts] So the main take away from all this is that view serializability is going to allow for slightly more schedules than you would have a conflict serializability but because you have to understand what the application actually wants to do with the data and what does

it mean for things to be correct or consistent then you can't you can't do this. So that means that if we're going to use conflict serializability as the the sort of the standard in which we determine whether a ordering is correct or not, there may be some cases where we could have more parallel interleings of our transactions, but we can't because we just don't know what is actually going on up above in the application stack. >> [snorts] >> The question is why can't I go why can't

I expand context in my implementation of the data system to allow for this because in most systems you don't have the transactions ahead of time. So you you would it would be sort of like this. It would be I would see like T1 would start and then T2 arrives wants to start something and then T3 later arrives wants to start something right and I don't know in the case of like T3 is it going to now do more things after that right on it. Some systems you can do that right uh and so in the case of the blind

right one some you could get away with this but the my example of like if I'm just summing things up rather sorry counting things rather than summing them I may not be able to do that so we're getting ahead of ourselves so Amazon Amazon DB there was a system called Fauna that went went bankrupt this year uh there there's there's some systems that do what that do called deterministic scheduling where in the case of Amazon DB you you your application starts a transaction, it does a bunch of reads

and writes, but it doesn't actually apply any of the changes to the database. And then when you go commit, then it actually goes back and replays the transaction and sees whether it gets the same results as it as it as it did when it sort of ran in, you know, pretend mode. And if it doesn't, then it's going to allow commit. And now if you have you have your schedule, now you can reorder things and and do stuff like this. >> The same is is it like a copy and write approach? Uh not even that just like I run it but

don't apply any changes without making a copy and then just run it again and see whether I get the same result. If no if yes then I know I didn't have any conflicts. >> The question is can you have rulebased serializability? What do you mean by rule >> based? >> [snorts] >> So even though you don't have [snorts] >> Yeah, transactions are what? So the statement is could I programmatically tell the data system it's okay for me for me to have certain interleings?

Yes. No system actually supports that as far as I know. You do this at a high level at the application level. So you would do this. Let me give an example. So uh there's high level notions of transactions. One would be like say I'm trying to sell tickets to uh Taylor Swift concert. actually the Taylor Swift concert was it last year whatever this tour the database crashed because they didn't do any of this right but the way because everyone's trying to update the same database and try to buy seats at

the same time so it crashed so the way to handle this would be if I know I have like east coast people and west coast people and I don't want have to communicate between each one because that's like I got to go across the country and that's slow how do I make how do I allow them to update things at the same time you can do what's called called escro transactions you can say all right say I'm trying to sell you know sell items like I'm trying to sell Taylor Swift Taylor Swift tickets and

ignore seats because that's hard, right? But say I'm just I have a fixed number of seats. How do I make sure that I don't sell more than I actually do have? So you just basically do what's called escort transactions. You say, "All right, East Coast you get you get 50 seats. West Coast gets 50 seats and only coordinate when you run out and need to get the next 50 seats." So there's high level things you can do to to handle all these these cases. But no system supports that natively. If you start

doing store procedures where where where I have procedural code like a function that has all the transaction log directly inside the database system then you can start doing some of these tricks but no no data system as far as I know looks inside the program logic within the store procedure to figure out what the interl should be. All right. All right. Let me just show before we go. I know we're over time. So the way to think about the scheduling stuff is these think of like there's this giant

universe of all the possible schedules you could have for a set of transactions and there's a very small region in the middle that corresponds to the serial orderings right which executing the transactions one after another and then around that there's a slightly larger region a conflict serializable schedules you do allow interleings again they're and then they're equivalent to a serial ordering and around that it's going to be view serializable that because any anything that's view serializable uh

sorry anything That's that's a serial ordering is by definition has to be view serializable. So around that you have a a a a larger region and it's hard to figure out what that large how to get into that larger region and we'll see next class there's other regions that span in other directions that can you know can be you know all all schedules and some may be serializable some may not be right this is awesome stuff and we'll cover more of this in the next couple classes. All right, let me just

finish up and say durability. We've talked about this already before. How to make sure that we if we crash and we come back and we see all our changes or roll back any changes and logging and shadow paging is how we're going to do that, right? All right. So, to finish up, this stuff is awesome. I hopefully uh I'm not getting like, you know, too excited, but uh like this is super hard to do. This is why all those NoSQL systems that came out 2010s like the Mongos and the Cassandra, all those

people didn't do transactions. They told you transactions told everyone transactions were a bad idea because it's really hard to do and really hard to get correct. And now people realize oh transactions are a really important idea really good because you don't want your JavaScript programmer writing random and and in you know coming up with in invalid state right we'll talk about vector clocks like if you have if you have to have people reason about vector clocks that's terrible that's like they can't do that.

So basically there was this big movement in the in the 2000s. Everyone was saying, "Oh, transactions are a great idea. We should do that. Sorry, transactions are a bad idea. We're not going to do that. We're not going to support SQL. We're not going to support the rational model." And then they've all come back around basically and now support all these things. Can anybody name the one company that was sort of inadvertently pushing this idea that transactions are a bad

idea? There was one company that was at the forefront of all this in the 2000s. Starts with a G. Google. Google had this system called Bigtable. In the paper they said, "We're not doing transactions. We're not doing SQL relational model." Everybody saw that and said, "Oh, Google's making a ton of money. They must know what's going on. Let's do the same thing. Let's not do transactions." And then they've all come back around and said, "Oh, yeah,

transactions are are a good idea." Now, Google figured this out too with Spanner. So, this is the Spanner paper came in 2012. So, meanwhile, like while everyone was saying, "We're not going to do transactions." Internally, Google's like, "Oh, we need transactions." And they eventually added it. And if you go read this paper, there's this great little uh this great little blur, right? Oh, it's disappointing. Ah, all right. This great little blurb. Let me just

show it without the animations where they basically admit, oh, yeah, not having transactions was a bad idea because you're better off having your random programmers, aka JavaScript programmers, uh, not worry about correctness issues. It's this blurb here, right? They have this great line. We believe it is better to have application programmers, JavaScript programmers, deal with performance problems due to overuse of transactions as a bottlenecks arise rather than coding around the lack of transactions.

They're basically saying get like Jeff Dean and really smart people uh and you pay them a lot of money. Make your transactional data system work really really well and that way the unwashed masses can take advantage of them and not spend the time reasoning about eventual consistency and other correctness issues. Okay. All right. Next class we'll talk about how we actually do this at runtime with using two-based locking. And we'll talk about these sort of more relaxed notions of serializability. Actually, not even

call that relaxed notion of correctness with isolation levels. Uh and then we'll see do some demos and see where things go wrong. Okay. I don't know if it's going to work, but go for it. Try it. [music] [music] clips over [music] [music] the [music] fortune. Get the maintain flow with the grain. [music] >> [music]

