[music] [music] I'm still associ [music] [music] if you make money you got to pay taxes. He's learning the hard way. So that he's he's there today with his accountant. Uh I don't that's his problem. Um all right, a lot to cover. Um and plus we have the guest speaker today. So I I want to get through as much as I can. Um all right, so last class we were talking about beginnings of concurrency control protocols in our database system. And the we talked about acid of course, but

then we spent a lot lot of time on the isolation portion of ACID where we were distinguishing between different levels of of correctness or serializability within schedules of transactions. We made the point that there's basically two that we care about in this class, although there's others we don't care about. There's two sort of main categories of sterilizability. Conflict serializability and view sterilizability. Complex serializability is what you get in pretty much any system they where they truly do support

serializable transactions. Uh this is what what this is what what you get right and we would verify that they were that schedules were conflict serializable if we created a dependency graph and we didn't have any cycles. We'll see the notion of cycles corresponding to issues and transactions when we talk about deadlock detection in a second. Um and then view civilizability was this higher level notion of civilizability where where it was okay for certain conflicts to occur that would not be allowed under conflict

civilizability but they they are allowed in view serializability if we understand the semantics of what the application actually wants to do with data like what does it mean to to read something and write something um and that's not something that we can easily derive automatically from just looking at read and write requests to the data system. we have to actually examine the application code or again worst case scenario ask a human uh about what data means in their application and therefore

no system is going to support this. All right. All right. So the other important thing to talk about last class is that I said I think I said this multiple times in all those examples when we had those schedules those were those sort of setups of of the problem were when I had all of the read and write operations that transactions were going to do ahead of time right that the the schedule was static there wasn't like you know when a transaction began you knew everything was going to do uh until it actually

committed or rolled back [snorts] and So we could we could look at the schedules you know you know in in in their totality and say okay yes the these are going to be serialized or not but now we need to build build a real system where we can assume we cannot assume we will have that schedules ahead of time. Some systems do. We can ignore that for now. And therefore, we need to be able to still provide conflexizability guarantees even if transactions are starting them. You know, starting a transa transactions

are starting and then sending query requests where we don't know what the additional queries are, the later queries are going to be later on. And the mechanism we're going to use to make this work today is going to be using locks, right? Hence the title of the lecture, two-based locking. So I briefly mentioned locks earlier in the semester when we talked about index concurrency show protocols and we made this distinction between locks and latches. So this is the same table that I showed

before where on the guess your your left hand side we had all the locks but we only focused on the right hand side when we talk about indexes to do latches. So now we're going to go back and look at all all these things right. So the way to understand locks is that they are going to be protecting uh uh database objects higher level database objects in in in in our system like tables and and tupils and um and and databases themselves. And we're going to allow multiple transactions to interle their

operations and operate on these rewrite to these uh on these um excuse me on these these these objects as they go along. The key thing that is going to be different about locks and transactions versus latches and indexes even though the transactions take latches as they update the indexes is that transactions will typically hold the locks for the entirety lifetime of the transaction. Whereas memory say with latches we were like trying to do something in a single page in index or a single node. So I was

trying to acquire the latch do something and then get out of it real quick and release the latch. In this world, we're gonna allow transactions to hold locks, you know, until they commit or finish. And the way we're going to have to handle deadlocks is through having this higher level these these protocols that can assure that we don't have deadlocks or having a sort of overseer or coordinator understand what transactions hold what locks at what time and what are they trying to do and then we can

arbitrate and decide how to break deadlocks. Whereas in case of latches, we said there wasn't going to be any doll detection. We had to make sure we wrote good code and didn't have these problems. In the locking world, we'll have to do this. We'll have to, you know, have the the resolution stuff written by us, the database system developers, because we're dealing with the application sending random queries, making random requests. You know, we can't assume they're going to know what

they're doing and avoid deadlocks. We have to make sure they don't shoot themselves in the foot. and the metadata we're going to maintain about what the what locks are being held by what transactions at what time. This is going to be kept in a centralized coordinator, centralized data structure called the lock manager where now we have a single location where we're keeping track of here's all the locks transactions are holding whereas in the case of latches we were going to embed the latches

directly in the data structure itself. Right? So again we we'll go through all this this make more sense as we go along but the key thing to understand is like again this is what I was saying there's a distinction between the OS world and our world like in the OS world a lock is really what they mean as a latch in the database world locks are these higher level things that are actually managing the contents of of a database itself within the database system. So let's look to see how how this would

work. So now we're going to have our schedules on the on the side here, right? We have T1, T2. T1's going to read A, write A, and read A again. And then T2 is going to uh read A and and write A. And now I'm introducing explicit lock commands like lock and unlock. And you're passing in what object you want to acquire, release the lock for. And we have now this this centralized lock manager that everyone has to talk to when they want to get a lock or release a lock. So at the beginning, T1 starts and says, I want to

lock object A. So goes to the lock manager say, "Hey, can I have the lock on on A?" And no, assuming that nobody else holds that lock right now, the lock manager grants access to that and it's given a lock. And then now T1 can go and uh read A. But then now when T2 starts running, it wants to acquire the lock on A, it goes to the lock manager. Lock manager says, "Oh, T1 already has this lock. You're not T1, you're T2. Therefore, I can't give you this request right now. And therefore, T2 is going to

have to stall and wait until the the lock that it that's asking for is released. Then T2 or T1 starts running again, does the right on A, read on A. Then it unlocks A here. And then now at this point, the lock manager knows, hey, there's also this transaction T2 that was waiting for this lock on A, but I told them that they weren't allowed to have it. So now I can grant the access to to A to T2, and then it's allowed to do whatever it wants and then release the lock when it commits. So this is

roughly the high level what we're going to talk about today and obviously the devil's in the details. How do we make sure that we don't have problems while we're doing this right and and you know this is sort of toy example we'll see other problems that can come up uh as we go along. So today we're start first talk about what kind of lock types you can have in our data system. Uh and then we'll use uh then we'll describe the two-phase locking protocol which is the

first provably correct or provably uh serializable concurrency to protocol developed by Jim Gray in the 1970s that you can to execute transactions and generate serializable schedules. Then we'll talk about how to handle deadlocks either through detection or prevention. Then we'll finish up talking about uh hierarchal locking where now I can expand the scope of of locks. and then we'll finish up with the flash talk from the from uh from from a German at at Firebolt. Okay. All right. So, when we talked about

latches, uh there was basically two type of latches, right? It was either in read mode or write mode in with locks. Now, we're instead of calling them read and writes, we're going to call them shared and exclusive, right? And and the compatibility matrix looks very similar to what we had before with with latches, right? If you have a shared lock, another shared lock can take the same lock at the same time. But as soon as I have an exclusive lock, no other lock type uh can take that lock at the same

time as I am. Right now, this is a gross simplification of how real systems actually work. If you go read the documentation for any any data system that supports locking, you're going to see there's a lot more uh lock types that they have. Now, for the MySQL one, these there's these intention locks. We'll get to those end of the semester or end of this lecture. But now you see in the case of like Oracle, you can have locks on tables. You can have different like row exclusives or not like like it

it gets gets way more complicated. Uh and so I'm not going to go through other than the intention locks at the end end of this class. We'll go through those. But all these other lock types that are maybe specific to a different database system, right? They're going to have their own nuances, their own characteristics. But the two-phase locking protocol and the higher code locking technique I'll show you at the end. This all still works with these extra lock types. It just sort of

complicates how you actually would implement this. But the the basic two-phase protocol, two-phase locking protocol will be the same. [snorts] All right. So now when transactions are going to execute, right before we can do any read or write to an object in the database, we have to request that we want to lock from the lock manager on that object. We can support upgrades. So if I have a shared lock on an object and I I know I'm going to need to update it, I can say go back to lock managers. I

already have the shared lock. Can I upgrade it to an exclusive lock? And it'll know whether any transaction already holds a shared lock and can would have to deny or allow that upgrade request. And then as transactions uh keep running, they can decide to release the locks, return them back to the lock manager. And then implicitly when they commit, all the locks are are released or when they when they abort, all the locks are released. So the lock manager is going to be maintaining its own basically hash table

that keeps track of what locks exist and who holds them and cues for for who's waiting to acquire a lock that's being held by somebody else right now. Right? But the key thing is going to have a global view of of what all the transactions that are running in the system and what locks they do they hold and what locks are they waiting for. Again, in all my examples here, right, anything I open up in a in in a terminal, you know, I can show maybe two or three transactions at a time. In real

high-end transactional systems, you can imagine like doing a 100,000 or even a million transactions per second. So, you got to maintain all this metadata for them, which can can get quite expensive. But when we crash and come back, we don't have to worry about uh reviving the state of the lock table, right? Because every transaction that was running is dead anyway. So, you just wipe everything. It's not like we need to persist anything like in a page directory or the actual data itself.

[snorts] All right. So let's look at an example here again. So now we're going to have uh instead of just lock and unlock we now we'll have the lock type. It's either exclusive lock or shared lock. Uh so T1 starts it gets exclusive lock on A. That's allowed. So the lock manager grants it. Then it does the read on A the right on A. Then it unlocks A, right? And then just say it's released and then keeps on running. But then now T2 is going to start. It's going to do a

give acquire the exclusive lock on A, then do the write on A and then return the the lock back on A to the lock manager. But then now T1 starts running again the bottom here and it goes gets gets the share lock on A reads A. But what's it going to see when it reads A? The different value than it saw before, right? So it's going to see the value that T2 wrote when it started running, right? And not the value that it wrote when it had the lock before, right? So what is this called? We did

this last class. >> Unre repeatable read, right? Like I I expected read something again to see the same value, but I didn't get it. Right? So the point I'm trying to find out here is that just because we have locks doesn't mean we magically get serializability, right? We got to be careful in how we give out the locks and when we actually release them. So this is what two-phase locking protocol does for us. This it's a it's the the way in which it defines how we're going to determine when a

transaction can acquire lock and what happens when they start releasing those locks and what can they do during that during that period. And as you'd expect in the name two-phase locking, it has two phases, right? And this is the this is the contraio protocol we would use if we don't know what transaction what the transactions are going to do ahead of time. We don't know what queries they're going to run. We don't know what data they're going to read and write to. So this locking protocol would be handled,

you know, that that dynamic environment. We don't have everything ahead of time. So the first phase in two days locking is called the growing phase. And this is where a transaction is allowed to uh request to the lock manager all the locks that it wants in any any mode that it wants. And the lock manager can grant and deny the request. If it denies it again, it'll just stall and wait until that lock is available or there's a it gets aborted because of a deadlock or something else. [snorts]

But then soon as a transaction releases one lock, it now automatically enters the shrinking phase where you're not allowed to acquire any more locks. only thing you can do is give back the locks you got during the during the growing phase. Right now the spoiler is going to be again I'm showing all these schedules with like lock and unlock as commands within the schedules. In actuality you don't in SQL you can't manually acquire locks and unlock them. uh I'll explain that what the implications of this in a

second but you know you can I mean for for certain things you can in some systems call like lock database and things like that but like typically when you run queries you don't say like lock lock object fu and then run a query on object fu it implicitly happens for you automatically when you run a select query or any query you want the data system says I know what you're trying to do because it's SQL and I I can it's declarative I know exactly what command you want so therefore it acquires the

locks for you automatically unlocking is tricky We'll cover that in a second. So again, the way to think about it visually uh is think of this as like the the lifetime of a transaction, right, from beginning to end. And in the first phase, I'm I'm uh I'm allowed to grow and acquire new locks. And think of like the the height in in the chart here, the y- axis is the number of locks being held by a transaction. So I can grow grow grow at acquire more locks but then at some point I release a lock and

then I enter the shrinking phase and the only thing I can do is is give locks back to the lock manager. Right? I can't do something like this where I release a bunch of locks and then go back and ask for more locks because then that that can cause uh cause problems and so the protocol would would not allow this. So if I go back to my example that I had before, right now using proper two-phase locking, T1 starts, it gets exclusive lock on A, that's allowed to happen. So then it can do the read on A and then

write on A and then it doesn't give up the lock that it has on A, right? Because it still has to be able to read it down below. So I can't again I don't want to have that problem where like I unlock it and then try to relock the same object. So now when T2 tries to get the exclusive lock on A, that gets denied and has to stall and wait until T1 finishes whatever it wants to do. And then soon as T1 unlocks A, that releases the lock to T2 and then T2 can do the right on A uh and and commit.

You're waiting. Stalled. Yeah. You can't do anything. I mean, for simplicity, yes. There's tricks to get around that. Yes. Yes. >> You don't [snorts] know the schedule. >> Uh their statement is and they are correct. If you can't explicitly say you want to unlock and you don't know everything you need ahead of time, how can you actually unlock? We'll cover this in a second. this in actuality there isn't really going to be a locking phase as we know it as we described

before they're going to use a more stricter form and we'll cover that in a second so when systems say they're used to based locking like SQL server you're you're going to have something more right [snorts] okay so by itself two locking is is enough to guarantee that the the the the schedules of the transactions you will generate in in real time at runtime at running the system will be conflicts or lizable, right? Meaning because if you define the pre the precedence graph or the

dependency graph, you'll have no cycles. So you can guarantee that it'll be conflicts or liable, but it is going to be subject to another problem called cascading aborts. That isn't a correctness issue. So it's not one of the anomalies like unre repeatable read, dirty reads, uh and uh loss updates we talked about last time. It's more of a performance issue where if you implement it in in as defined in two basic locking not not talking about the at least at the end as he's talking about they were

talking about the if if you allow transactions to unlock objects in the middle of the transactions and still do more stuff they can't acquire new locks but they still can do more stuff then we can have this problem of cascading boards so it looks like this. So say now T1 wants to do a lock on A, lock on A, then switch lock on B, read A, write A, unlock A, then go read B and write B, and at the bottom here, it's going to abort and roll back all it changes. Right? So the problem is going to be if T with T2,

soon as A releases the T1 releases the lock on A, T2 can get the lock on lock on A, then it can read it and it can write it and it's going to read the change that was made by T1. But then later on T1 aborts and then now we have again a dirty read here right where we read something that uh we we shouldn't have seen because technically because the transaction has committed but it's still allowed under two-phase locking right there's this additional metadata we would keep track of in our system to

say well T2 read something from T1 that T1 modified but T1 hasn't committed yet so I can't let T2 commit to I know whether T1 commits in this case here T1 does not commit. MIT T2 therefore and T1 aborts therefore T2 has to abort. So this is what I mean by cascading roll back where a a roll back of one transaction may cause other transactions to have to abort and roll back as well because they read something from that uncommitted transaction. Right? And the reason why we can't allow T2 to commit here we'd have to actually

wait until you find out what happens about T1 is again we can't leak any information to the outside world about an uncommitted transaction. Right? I can't tell the client, here's what your data actually looks like. Uh, and and then have it do something based on that information >> in the back. Yes. >> The question is how how is this two-ace locking example? What what >> how does that solve the problem you did in the earlier earlier in the lecture? So the the let's go back to the first

example. In the first example, right, the problem was I was acquiring a lock on a and then releasing lock on a in T1. Go back here, right? And then T1 did whatever like it it it prompted an LLM and has to wait whatever, right? And then now control switch over to T2. T2 starts running. It gets the exclusive lock on A, which is allowed to do because nobody holds the lock on A right now. It does it right, then unlocks A. Control goes back to T1. Now T1 gets the shared lock on A, which is allowed to do

because nobody holds that. And then now when it reads it, it reads something that it didn't didn't expect to see. If they were running in true serial order, it'd either be T1 followed by T2 or T2 followed by T1. In this scenario here with my interle, I'm seeing something from an intermediate state that I shouldn't see. Right? So with two-phase locking, we avoid this problem because T1 would not be allowed to unlock A up above and then acquire it again. As soon as you enter the shrinking phase, you

can never acquire new locks. >> The statement is you cannot release locks in the growing phase. Soon as you release one lock, you're now in the growing phase automatically. Sorry, what I say? Soon as you release a lock in the growing phase, you're now in the shrinking phase automatically. Yes. [snorts] >> Yeah. To the point. Yes. Yes, they are correct. But like what it really should be is like I just put it in the middle, but like it really should be as soon as I release one thing, it goes down. Yes.

That that you're the first person to point that out in in five years. So yes, we should fix that. Um, think of it like really like this again without the hump going up, right? That can't happen. But as soon as I release one, the number locks goes down. And now now I'm in the tricky phase. But you know, this one's a violation. You can't do this. Okay. So again this this problem here where if we uh under two-based locking you can read data from uncommitted transactions because you again you're maybe you

assume that they're going to commit but again you have to maintain metadata and say this transaction read something from a transaction that hasn't committed therefore I can't commit until I find out whether they commit and and therefore if the transaction that I read their uncommitted read from aborts I have to abort as well. So this is the cascading roll back problem. And so the challenge is going to be again for two transactions no big deal. But in a real system if I now have like

thousands of transactions that depend on this other transaction and that other transaction aborts I have to abort all those other transactions and it's a bunch of wasted work and you're basically burning cycles uh and doing IO for things that never actually commit and get anything any real work done. Yes. The question is in my example here, how does transaction T2 know that T1 that knows it needs to roll back because it read something from T1? There's extra metadata you're maintaining in the

system for this which is not showing in the PowerPoint in the back. So the question is uh how did T1 T2 acquire the lock on A because should shouldn't T2 be shrinking? Yes, but it released the lock on A, not the lock on B. Still has the lock on B, right? So it's it can still do whatever it wants after that point. I can still do reads and writes. Just because you're in the shrinking phase doesn't mean you can't do other things. You can do things on on the locks you hold. You just can't

acquire new locks. [snorts] >> Yeah. So their statement is this the the notion of what phase I'm in is in a per transaction basis not globally in the system. Correct. Yes. So T1 is is is has its own am I in the growing phase or the shrinking phase? T2 and whatever transaction they have their own phases. it isn't for the entire system. Okay. So the thing to point out here now though this means that if we um what is this there are maybe scenarios where we could actually have um schedule schedules of transactions

that are actually serializable but because the two-phase locking protocol is pessimistic meaning if they assume they're going to have aborts and so you assume they're going to have conflicts And therefore you require require everyone to acquire locks before they can do anything. There there there may actually be scenarios where you can you you could actually have better parallels and better performance. But if you follow two-phase locking as defined you you end up giving up giving that up.

Again, that's okay because if if it's, you know, running anything that's super critical like like with money like your bank account, uh you don't want to have you don't really care the database is faster if it ends up losing money like your money, right? So that's why transactional systems that are going to be doing two phase locking or the other protocol we'll talk about next class, right? They're going to choose uh correctness typically over performance. The default though isn't again when we

talk about isolation levels the default isn't actually going to be serializable in most systems it's going to be a lower form where you can have some problems and it turns out sometimes that's okay and banks really don't do updates like in place they always have a ledger where you're you're running all the transactions and then they they do summations. So banks are not the perfect example for this but just think anything with money uh you know you don't you don't want to have uh incorrect issues.

All right. So with two-phase locking again we can still have dirty reads but again we have to maintain metadata about what transactions read from what data from what other transactions so that if one transaction aborts we roll back and that's the cascading abort problem. Um one solution to that will be the strong strict two-phase locking which is what they they were asking about. And then of course we can still have deadlocks because now we're allowing transactions to acquire locks any for any object they

want and you may have dependencies between two of them and we have to handle that. So we'll tackle the first problem. How do we how do we handle dirty reads and this cascading abort problem and then we'll talk about how we want to handle deadlocks. So the again bringing back up the point they they brought up the the way every system that I'm aware of uh that does two-phase locking the way it's actually going to be implemented is not the protocol where you have this notion of a shrinking phase uh that you

can still uh you can incrementally unlock things as you go along. Instead, they're going to be implementing what's called strong strict two-phase locking where the shrinking phase basically just happens at the end. Meaning, at some point, I say, "All right, I've acquired all the locks that I need." And then I hold all those locks until I go commit, and then all of them are released. And this avoids the dirty read problem because I I'm never going to release a lock uh on I'm never going to release a

lock on something that I modified and therefore someone else can go read it. They can't read anything until I fully have committed. So that at the end is when everything gets released. >> Like the shrinking phase is just like this little blip at the end. Yes. But I'm just trying to visually show what it looks like. >> So there is a uh a less restrictive form of of this protocol called strict two-based locking. So not strong strict just strict. I'll explain what strict is

in next slide. um where you're allowed to release the exclusive locks before transaction commits, but you still hold all the shared locks. And again, that allows you to release things uh and um to maybe sort of free up more more opportunities for other transactions to run, but it still has the the dirty read problem. So strictest means that if a value is is written by a transaction then it's not going to be read or overwritten by any other transaction until the last transa the transaction that modified that

object has committed. So again this avoids the cascading abort problem and it actually makes undoing changes of aborted transactions really easy because you don't have to worry about this dependency chain of like undoing this followed by undoing this followed by undoing this. you just say here's the here's here's the last here's the last version last value of this object that's transaction modified and you just undo just undo that one and so any data system that's doing

two-phase locking uh and supports serializable transactions is going to be doing strong strict 2PL right because there's no explicit way to unlock things in in SQL >> uh strong means you hold everything the right locks sorry the exclusive locks and the shared locks if it's just strict you just you You can release the exclusive but keep the shared I think uh >> so uh for your right yes so strong trick avoids cascading boards strict strict TPL >> still can have them >> a schedule

you can only guarantee that your schedule is good if you have strong >> correct Yes. And I think a textbook might also call them rigorous. Uh but they all it all means the same thing. [snorts] >> Strict strict pupl by itself. You keep the share locks to the end. You can release the exclusive locks in the shrinking phase. >> Uh [snorts] yes. Let me follow PA. I might I might be flipping the order, right? But then the main thing I I want you to understand is like with strong strict you definitely hold

everything to the end and then in a lesser form of strong strict strict 2PL you're releasing one type of lock and I might have that reversed. I apologize. Let me follow up on that. [snorts] All right. So let's look at an example here of doing strong TPL. So, we want to take $100 out of DJ uh DJ Cash's account and move it to his bookiey's account or his tax tax accountant's account. Um, and then in another transaction, we're going to do that summation we had before. We're just

going to read A, read B, and then just spit out the the summation of the two. So, I'm going to show example how to if you don't do this with TPL, what happens? And then if we don't if we use regular TPL, what happens? And then what happens when we use strong strict TPL? So, we don't do any TPL. We could have a schedule like this where we start T1, right? It gets exclusive lock on A, then it does a read on A, then T2 tries to get the shared lock on A, but because T1 holds the exclusive lock on A, it's

going to get blocked and wait. And then control goes back to T1. It does does the the update on A and writes it to the database. And then it unlocks A, at which point this now releases the lock to T2. So T2 can read A, right? Okay. And now it's going to read the the change that T1 made. Then it unlocks A, takes a share lock on B, reads B, but then now when T T1 tries to get the exclusive lock on B to update it to put the $100 back into the B's account, it gets paused and blocked because it can't

get the exclusive lock on B, control goes back to T2. T2 releases that that lock, right? Spits out the output of A plus B. And then now we do the update on the um uh on update on B, unlock it, commit. But then again, just like before in our example, we had we were missing money. We're missing $100 in our summation from T2's output because we read A after we took the money out, but and we read B before the money was put in. Right? So this again, this this would not have happened if it was

running T1 followed by T2 or T2 followed by T1 in a in a serial ordering. So now if I do two-based locking same thing starts I get the T2 sorry T1 starts gets exclusive lock on A does a read on A and then when T2 tries to get the share lock on A it gets paused and waited waits uh now I get the exclusive lock or sorry update A do the right to A get the exclusive lock on B and now I can unlock A which I'm allowed to do in two-phase locking because now I'm in the shrinking phase for T1. So then T2 could start

running, does the read on A, tries to get the share lock on B, that gets blocked because T1 has that. So then control goes back to T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T1, does the read on A, adds the $100 to it, writes it out, unlocks B, and then T2 can can run and produces the correct result. Right. Right. The key thing is again the T1 acquired all the locks that it needed and as soon as unlocked A, then it can't acquire a new one. Now, a strong streak 2PL, this one is basically comes down to being serial

ordering, at least for this example here, right? Because T2 is going to try to get the shared lock on A, but it's not it's going to get denied because T1 got it first and T1's not going to release that shared lock until it commits, right? And then it does the read on A, then it tries to get the share lock on B. At this point, T1 has already released that lock, so it's allowed to get it uh and then finish it processing and then produce the correct result. Yes. >> The question is shouldn't the unlock

happen after the commit? Like how is this in I'm starting in PowerPoint, but yes. And again, this is why there's no explicit unlock command. when you call commit then like it h unlocking happen is all part of it it's part of the commit so the way to go think about again what the the the 2PL stuff provides for us in the context of the the universe of schedules we could possibly have remember we had serial in the middle and around that encompassing it is conflict serializable schedules and around that are few

serializable schedules so then now this region here are going to schedules that do not allow for cascading aborts and some of them will be you know viewizable conflictizable or even or even serial and some of them just aren't right and then more narrowly inside of conflict serializable is going to be where strong strict 2PL exists and around that you can think of like even even more broadly would be where 2PL exists but in case of strong 2PL none of those schedules will have cascading aborts

Okay. All right. So now we go back to the the second issue we we talked about of you know we we now know how to handle the dirty read problem with strong GPL. Now we have to handle for hand to hand handle deadlocks. Right? Again this is the classic concurrent programming 101 stuff. Right? T1 starts get exclusive lock on A. That's allowed to happen. T2 wants to get a share lock on B. That's allowed to happen. But now when T2 tries to get the share lock on A, that gets denied because T1 already

holds it. But then later on T1 tries to get the share lock on B and that gets denied because T2 holds it. So of course now we have again a classic deadlock. We have two transactions that are both hold locks and they're waiting for locks held by the other transaction and therefore they're never going to get released. So deadlock obviously is just again a cycle in our dependencies between the locks that that transactions hold and the locks that they want to acquire uh and they're just waiting for the other

one to to release it. So the two ways we're going to handle this is through either deadlock detection where we have an active mechanism goes and says I find I'm finding the deadlocks let me go kill something to go go break it or deadlock prevention where when a transaction tries to acquire a lock based on an ordering protocol or priority protocol we will determine who's allowed to wait for a lock and who has to give up a lock and and and abort and restart and the the thing I'll say is like this

is where again another distinction between the high-end expensive systems like the oracles like the DB2s uh these systems are actually support both of these methods versus like my SQL I think only has has one of them and you can as as a human operator administrator of these systems you can toggle the the the runtime knobs or parameters to determine which of these ones you want to use for your transactions because it's going to depend on what the workload is what the hardware is which one of these is

actually going to be better. >> [snorts] >> All right. So for deadlock detection, the way this is going to work is that the the lock manager is going to maintain what's waits for graph is basically equivalent to like the dependency graph of what what transactions are waiting for locks held by other transactions. And you would if now then the system detects that there's a cycle in this graph you know there's a deadlock and therefore it has to then deploy some mechanism to decide or protocol to

decide which transaction does it want to abort and kill so that it breaks the deadlock and then transactions can keep on running. And so the the the challenge is going to be how aggressive you want the data system to be in looking for these for these deadlocks. Again, for two transactions, three transactions, no big deal. But think of like tens of thousands of transactions with very complex dependency graphs or weight source graphs, right? You can pick your favorite cycle detection algorithm. Uh

but sometimes those aren't cheap to run. So if you're trying to check for a deadlock every millisecond, you're basically burning cycles looking for deadlocks where you could be using those resources to actually execute transactions. But if I only run it every five minutes, then I may have transactions sitting around for, you know, 4 minutes 59 seconds because of a deadlock and waiting for the next time the the the cycle detector goes through and finds a deadlock. So, how to balance the the how aggressive you want to be in

breaking the deadlocks versus how quickly you want to um uh how quickly you want to release them and release and get get transactions running again. You know, there there isn't one answer and this is what again the high-end systems allowed to tune tune these things. [snorts] All right. So, so the basic protocol is pretty straightforward, right? Every time that there's a transaction that's waiting for a lock being held by another transaction, uh I just add an edge for my weight for graph here, right? And I

know what locks transactions hold because it's in my transaction uh to my my lock manager in that hash table and I know what transactions they're trying to trying to I know what locks transactions are requesting because again I have my cues in my in my lock manager keeps track of what they're waiting for. So again say here T2 wants to lock on C but T1 T3 holds that. So you have an edge from two to three, T2 to T3. And then now T3 has once a lock on A, but that's being held by T1. So again, I have a

deadlock. So when we detect this, I'll say also too, like a simple way you would do this is uh the the the detection algorithm could do something really simple like just look for two transaction cycles like T1 and T2 are deadlocked. Run that first because that's cheap to do. find any deadlocks and maybe clean those up and then but if you don't find anything or if you did the two two transaction cycle check and breaking them or killing transaction didn't release other transaction didn't release the the major

bottleneck then you run the more expensive cycle detection algorithm. So you sort of do a quick fix and see whether that solves problems because most problems will be will be like that but then you can run the more expensive one afterwards. All right. So when we detect a deadlock now the data system has to decide which transaction to kill to abort and and and to break that deadlock. Remember I said last class that you know every transaction starts with begin and then they can either say commit or they can

say abort to you know tell the transaction itself wants to abort but the JSON could also decide on its own that it has to board as well. So that that's that's what this this one is. So when the when the the system says all right tell the transaction to abort right it releases all the locks undo un undoes all its changes um to provide the atomicity guarantees and then it can either restart itself uh or we throw an exception back to the uh to the to the application saying this transaction aborted and rely on the

application to restart it for us right if it's a store procedure think of like a RPC call we just invoke the RPC again inside our data system. But if we have to go back to the application code, they might not have exception handling to be able to restart things. So the decision of what you know what transaction should be the victim that you're going to kill off and and and release all their locks depends on a lot of different factors that the data systems can take into consideration that

uh can have a pretty significant difference in performance. So, a common thing would be like you just pick whatever transaction is either the oldest or the newest and you go ahead and and kill them, right? Typically, you pick the newest because you would say maybe they haven't been around long enough and I'm not starving them if I kill them. Of course, now when they come back, you make sure that they have maybe the same time stamp uh so they have this, you know, a higher priority than they had before. It could

also be how much work the transactions already done so far, right? Maybe they've they've updated a billion records. you have two transactions that are conflicted and they have a deadlock. One transaction updated a billion records. One transaction updated one record. I'm better off killing the one record transaction because I don't want have to undo all the work that that the that the other transaction did because that was expensive to do and I don't want to waste, you know, waste the time

of it. You can also look at how much how many items the transaction has locked so far. It's sort of like the work. How much work have I have I done? How much how many how much data has the transaction read or modified? locks are kind of the same thing. Um because again going to the lock manager and acquiring the the locks is not for not free, right? We have to protect it with latches like we did in the page table in the bufferable manager. So that's an expensive operation to go acquire locks.

And so if someone has a billion locks held versus somebody has one lock held, maybe better off killing off the the one the one lock transaction. If we allow for cascading aborts, we can also keep track of how many transactions are going to have to get rolled back if we kill one of those transactions. Right? Strong strict TPL doesn't have this problem, but other other protocols do. All right. So again, there's a lot of different things we we can consider when we want to decide when a transaction which transaction to abort.

And this is where again the high-end systems where you're paying millions of dollars for them. They're going to maintain all these kind of statistics internally and try to figure out the the best choice for you. Whereas I I at least for my SQL I think it's just like you know whatever transaction is the newest they just kill that. So it's it's pretty basic, pretty simple, right? [snorts] All right. So now when a transaction rolls back, question be how far do we roll it back? Now I've sort of assuming

so far when I say I'm going to kill a transaction, it it gets completely aborted. But it doesn't have to be that. So we can show demos of this next class. Um, but there's these things called save points where while my transaction is running, I call begin, but then I can also kind of establish a checkpoint called a save point within that transaction and I could potentially roll back to that save point uh to break a deadlock without having to roll the entire transaction back. So I can maybe

update, you know, five records, take a save point, then try to update the sixth record, but then I can't acquire the lock for that. So rather than just killing, you know, avoiding the transaction entirely, I'll just roll it back for some some some amount of work up to the save point and then that breaks the deadlock, but then I don't have to roll everything back. I potentially don't have to tell the application server that they've that there's a deadlock for it as well. >> What's that?

>> The question is how do you decide where to take a state point? It's application code. So the application code has to say I want to take a state points. It's not something it does automatically. for some things like if the say a single update query um it updates two records, it gets the the lock for the first record, tries to get the lock for the second record. That causes a deadlock for that one. You could you could break the deadlock by uh undoing the change of the first the the the first tupil that updated that

release of the deadlock and then you can re-execute that query once you know once things are dislodged without having to go back back to the application server. So some things you can do implicitly other things require explicit commands in SQL to create state pointsity at a table level or cell level. >> The question is is the granular to lock at a row level, table level or something else. At this point here we're not we're not defining I mean my example I said tuples when we talk about hyper locking it

could be anything. The question is again what am I locking when I say an object a in most system it's going to be a single record a tupil doesn't have to be and again we we'll see how we do that handle that in a second all right so deadlock prevention is is rather than relying on a background worker to go look for deadlocks in the lock manager and and and and break them up uh instead what we're going to do is when a transaction tries to require a lock that's being held by another

transaction already then the data It has to decide which one to kill at that moment to avoid having a deadlock. And for this one, we don't need to wait for a graph. We just need to know who waits for what and we need to know timestamps of when you know when transactions started. So there be two methods of data prevention. And again, the high-end systems can support both. So every transaction it's going to be assigned a time stamp of when they started u and then that's used to determine

their priority over other transactions. And then the two protocols are going to say who's allowed to wait for what uh what what transactions whether transaction is allowed to wait for another transaction to release a lock or not. Uh and if we guarantee that that waiting only happens in sort of one direction of priorities we can be we can ensure that we don't have deadlocks. So the wait for die or wait die which is the old ways for the young. This means that if the transaction that's trying to

acquire the lock has a higher priority than the holding transaction uh meaning it's it's older uh like the time stamp is is less then the requesting transaction is allowed to to wait for that that other transaction to give up the lock. But if the the transaction that's trying to acquire the lock is younger than the transaction that holds the lock then that requesting transaction has to kill themselves. Win for weight is the opposite like the young waits for the old. So if the requesting transaction is uh younger

than the transaction that holds the lock then it's allowed to wait. If it's older then it has to kill itself. So let's look at explicit examples here right? So we have two transactions two two sorry two schedules for two different transactions t1 and t2. So the first one here at the top T1 starts but so it has a time stamp be less than T2 the time stamps are one and two. So T1 starts, gets time stamp one. T2 starts, it gets time stamp two. T2 gets to use the lock on A. But then T1 tries to get

that same lock on A. And under wait for die, where the old waits for the young because T1 is older than T2, it's allowed to wait for T2 to finish to acquire that lock. Under wound and weight, T2 will end up getting uh aborted because the basically saying, I'm not waiting for you. I'm older than you. I'm going to go, you know, ste steal your lock and kill you. Right in now this other example here again T1 starts gets exclusive lock on A. T2 then starts tries to get the exclusive lock

on A and under wait and die. All right, T2 has to abort because in wait and die the old weights for the young because T2 is younger than T1. It's not allowed to wait and it has to kill itself. In the case of wound weight where the the young waits for the old T2 is allowed to wait for T1. All right. So why does this guarantee that there's no deadlocks? Because all the waiting is going to happen in one direction. Again, you would implement just one either wound weight or weight die. You don't

implement both of them. I mean, you can, but you can only run one at a time. So it's like when we talked about latching in the the B pus trees along the leaf nodes or noting leases in the in just traversal itself all our workers were starting from the top going to the bottom. We didn't have anybody else going in the other direction. So you can't have deadlock. So it's all the waiting is sort of going in in one direction. So weight die wound weight basically the same thing but at more

nuance because now you're dealing with you know coming at different directions but you only allow one of them to actually occur and that guarantees that you you don't have any deadlocks. So when a transaction restarts we have to give it a a new priority but we're just going to use the same time stamp of when they started before the first time they were boarded. So that guarantees that eventually they'll be like, you know, an old person that just gets gets whatever they want, right?

And it doesn't doesn't get starved. [snorts] And like I said, the in some workloads wound weight is better, other workloads weight die is better. And then the high-end systems allow you to toggle on which one you want to use. [snorts] All right. So now coming up to their question earlier, all my examples here, we're just assuming that we have a one to one mapping of database objects and I didn't find exactly what they were to to locks, right? But the challenge with this one is it's not going to be scalable. So if

I if I have a transaction that wants to update a billion tupils and everything I've told you so far, I got to go to the lock manager and get a billion locks. And again, it's a page table or it's it's a hash tree like the page table, but I have to protect it with latches. uh because it's a centralized data structure and if I got to go in and get a billion locks, chances are that the cost of going acquiring the locks is going to be more expensive than just updating whatever the records is

whatever the records that I wanted to update, right? It's not like a latch where I'm flipping a 64-bit integer and I can do that in a single instruction in the CPU. I gota I got to traverse the you know hash hash what I'm looking for do my search into the hash table then acquire latches for whatever the things I want to modify. [snorts] So we can get around this problem by introducing different kind of lock granularities and now we can define locks to have scope or the the the thing

that they're locking can encompass larger and larger logical parts of of of a database itself. So now when I say acquire lock I can acquire lock on a a database a table a page in the table a tupil and then in in the lowest case I can on a single column or a single attribute within a within a uh within a tupil and in an ideal scenario we want our data system to acquire the smallest number of locks that has actually needs to do whatever it is the transaction wants to do because then we go into that

lock manager in fewer times but the trade-off's going to be if I have if I'm only acquiring you coarse grain locks that like for the entire database then that's going to block out other transactions from running at the same time and I and I get bad parallelism. So we can introduce this this notion of a lock hierarchy and what this means is that think of at the very top you have a database and within that it has tables. So if I acquire a lock on the database that implicitly acquires the lock on

everything down below within that database. And so now if I want to do certain things, if I would update a billion tupils in a table, instead of acquiring a billion locks on individual tupils, I need to acquire the lock on the table and that guarantees that I'm protected from other transactions. So all the transactions have to sort of enter this tree and acquire the locks in the same direction. [snorts] So T1 shows up and again I want to update the entire table. So if I just get the the lock on the

table at the top, implicitly I have the locks for everything down below. So MongoDB, the first version of MongoDB when it came out, they only had database locks. So anytime you had a writer, uh, they would lock the entire database. It's sort of what how SQLite works. Now, SQLite only allows for one writer thread. Now they allow for multiple readers and you can potentially read other parts of the the the of the data at the same time you're writing to it. But they sort of have this this model

where like you only lock you you have a sort of single lock for the entire database for for writers. Readers can read different things. So the way to think about how different systems implement this the tuple level locks are very very common pretty much anybody that's doing face or anybody that's doing two-phase locking is going to be doing this. The next one would be table locks are very common. page locks they're more nuance we'll see that uh in two more two more lectures but like some

systems can do that you can do database locks uh in some systems you can like post you can lock the entire table I don't know if you can lock the entire database um you can put the database in readon mode and that's sort of like the same thing [snorts] I only know one system that does attribute level locks and that's yugabyte uh which is pretty impressive and the challenge is going to be when we talk about multiverging is In order to put this, I got to put information in the in the header of

every single attribute or every single tupole. What locks are being held by that that tupil for within its attributes? And again, it opens up more parallelism, but it's more it's it's it's a more complicated protocol to implement and there's more metadata you have to maintain. [snorts] All right. All right. So now the problem is if I just have only two lock modes shared and exclusive then it becomes kind of challenging to start do anything more sophisticated using this hierarchy because you know someone could

take an exclusive lock on the table and maybe only to update a small number of tupils and that would be good. So I want a way to be able to hint to other transactions what's going belong going on below me in the tree without having to go in the tree and traverse everything to find what I need. Because again under two-based locking I have to acquire locks on objects before I'm allowed to do anything on those objects. So I have to check this thing first before I can do anything. So this is where intention locks are

going to help us. Intention locks me hints for us in this hierarchy tree uh of the lock granularities that convey information about what's going on below me in the tree without having to go down into the tree and look at everything. Right? It's just a hint for other other other uh other transactions. And the three basic types we're going to have are intention shared, intention exclusive, and shared intention exclusive. So attention shared basically says a hint to say, hey, down below me

in the tree, I'm going to be taking things. There's going to be some some object will be taken in uh in uh in shar shared mode. Tent inclusive says some things down below me are be in exclusive mode. And then shared intention exclusive means that I'm going to take that object and everything below it in shared mode. But then down below within that I'll upgrade my locks and take something in exclusive mode but not at the level where this lock is being defined. All right. So what does this look like

for now? Our compatibility matrix. Now it's getting more complicated, right? Because again now we have these intent intention locks plus the original shared and exclusive locks. Again exclusive locks block everything else. So you can't do anything with that. But like with a intention shared you can start sharing this. Sorry, it's compatible with everything but exclusive because again it's just a hint to say hey down below me I'm doing something but not exactly at the level that I'm at you're

at right now. So the locking protocol becomes a bit more complicated where now before I go and you do whatever reader write I want to do on the object in the database. I go into my hierarchy figure out at the high level what intention locks I maybe need to hold because I'm trying to reduce the number of total number of absolute locks I'm taking for my transaction and then the at the lowest level then I'll either take things in either uh either exclusive mode or shared mode again depending on what my operation is

actually going to be. Right. And now me standing here with waving my hands does probably not helping. So let's look at let's look at a bunch of examples. So it's the same one we had before. We're going to check the balance of DJ cash's bank account. And then we're going to increase his bookies account balance by 1%. So for this one, we're going to take explicit exclusive and shared locks for the leaf nodes in our lock tree hierarchy, but then we'll have the intention hit locks up above to tell the

transactions what's going on down below. >> [snorts] >> So for to keep it simple, we only have two levels. We have table locks and tubal locks. Again, you have page locks, you can have attribute locks, you can have database locks. It's all, you know, it all still works the same. So when T1 starts, it wants to read uh a single record in in the in the in the table. So it only wants to get this lock in in shared mode. So in my hierarchy as I go down I'm going to give a take an

intention shared lock at this at the table level and then traverse now down and get the shared lock that I want uh explicit shared lock on the on the two I'm going to going to read and for T2 that's going to update a record in in the table we we want to get a uh we want to take this bottom block in exclusive mode again in our compatibility matrix intention shared is compatible with an intention exclusive lock, right? But not exclusive lock. So I don't want to take an exclusive lock on the table because

that's going to block every everything uh any any reads and rights on the table and it's going to get denied too because T1 already held the intention shared lock. So instead I'm going to take an intention exclusive lock on on the table again giving hint to other transactions say hey down below me I'm taking exclusive lock and I get the exclusive lock on the one tool I want to modify and therefore these two transactions can run in parallel and they don't interfere with each other

more complex example so now we'll do three transactions T1's going to scan all the tupils in R and update one of them T2 is going to read a single tupil in R and then T3 three is going to read all the tupils in R but not update any of them [snorts] and assume they're they're showing up in you know T1 followed by T2 followed by T3 and I'm not defining whether I'm doing deadlock detection deadlock prevention it doesn't matter at this point right I'm just trying to explain how we're actually

taking the locks in the hierarchy so T1 wants to read all the tupils in R and update one of them right so I'm going to read a bunch of these and then write this last one here so for this I could take a shared intention exclusive lock at the table level and then I only need to take an exclusive lock on the one tuple I need to modify because it's shared in exclusive the shared part is is explicit. So that means t2 tuple one and tupil two and every other tupil below this table are going to be in

shared mode or locked in shared mode for this transaction and then the one lock the one two I want to modify I take that in explicit exclusive mode then now when t2 wants to come along and it wants to read a single tupole in the table say this one over here I can again look at my compatibility matrix and know that shared intention exclusive is compatible with a intention shared Right? Because then saying like, "Hey, down below me, I'm going to read something." So I get intention shared on

the table and then take the shared lock on the first tupil here. And again, that's compatible with shared intention exclusive because because again implicitly T1 has all the tupils in shared mode and only this one the the end in exclusive mode. But then now when T3 shows up, it wants to get scan all the tupless in R. And for this instead of going get every single tupil in shared mode it wants to get a shared lock on the table because again I'm trying to minimize the number of times I'm going to the lock manager.

So I get the shared lock on R then implicitly get all the other tupils in R in in shared mode. But because that conflicts with the shared intention exclusive lock uh being held by T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T1. Therefore, T3 has to wait. T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T2 then commits, releases the uh tension shared lock that still doesn't block us, unblock us T3. Only when T1 commits, then we can get the share lock on R and we can we we can then read

everything we want. So you can also go back too. You you can say like say for T3 it's going to read all the tupils, but uh maybe it doesn't know the number of tupils there are, right? Maybe the statistics are wrong. So it could say things like, well, I think there's a thousand tupils, so I'll just get a thousand tupal locks. That's fine. But then it keeps going now realizes there's a billion tupils. You can then go back in the hierarchy and say upgrade my you my tension shared

lock at the table level and put it into uh you know into shared mode. Right? Again, this is just repeating what I said that you can you can switch to more quer locks when you realize you're requiring too many low-level locks or explicit locks down below. Yes. >> Question is why does T3 take a share lock here instead intention shared? Because say that it knows there's a billion tuples down below that it doesn't require a billion locks for all those individual tubless. It's better

off to take the shared lock at the table level. >> Yeah. Yes. The statement is well the question is why did T1 take a shared intention exclusive? Because it's going to do a mix but it knows it needs to read everything and it's going to only update one of them. So the shared intent exclusive gets everybody in read mode down below implicitly and then I take the one explicit exclusive lock on the two I'm going to modify. >> Yeah, the statement is and they're correct. If I if it knew it was going to

update everything down below it would just take lock an entire table. Yes. You see that in things like um uh like when when you modify the schema of a table and I'm going to add a column or drop a column. I'll take an exclusive lock on the table so I can I can make that change and prevents anybody else from from reading or writing anything while while I'm making that change. That's the easy way to do schema changes. All right. So, as I said before, you don't you typically don't manually acquire locks

in in in SQL in your application code. It's only, you know, when you go try to run a SQL query, the data figures out for you which level of the hierarchy you want you want to acquire and what locks you're actually going to need. But there's sometimes in in SQL you actually can give hints to the database server that what you actually want what locks you want to acquire and in what mode uh as part of the SQL command itself right an example I said before you could take a lock on when you know on a database or

a table and you're going to make major changes update all the tupless rather than you know having the lock manager fig out you just lock the entire table and make your change that's very common one of the most common techniques you can are what's called four update hints. And so in my SQL query, I have you know select star from whatever table with a wear clause. And if I don't have this four update piece, when I run this query, the data center is going to take your locks in shared mode, right? But if I put this

four update thing at the end, it says it's basically saying, hey, I'm going to read this and the very next thing I'm going to do is write to it. So don't acquire it in shared mode. just immediately acquired it in exclusive mode because the next query is coming at you is going to be an update query or a delete or something like that right and the in I don't forget whether this is in the SQL standard but the for update one is very common my SQL has different syntax lock and share mode or lock on

whatever mode you want right for for select statements but you can see here from the postest documentation there's a bunch of variations of it like for key share for share for no key update or for update and it shows you the compatibility matrix with with with with a bunch of them. So this is super common when you have like read modify write workloads like read someone's bank account and then take money out of it. You would you would run queries using for update and that avoids the problem

of like I read something get the shared lock in lock manager I got to go in lock manager for that then next query is going to try to update it and I'm going to go back in lock manager and try to upgrade that. So, so rather than doing the read and not then later on realizing you can't get the the exclusive mode lock just read it and get the exclusive mode lock while you're reading it and that way if it fails you're not you know you didn't read data you didn't run the read query that you end up rolling back

unnecessarily. Yes. running. >> The question is uh if you're running your your your transaction at a lower isolation level, which we will cover next class, does this change the semantics? No. >> No. >> Uh hold up. Uh let me think about that. Uh exclusive locks. Yeah. for the transaction if you take I mean if you're taking exclusive lock mode you're basically you're putting things in serial order potentially we'll cover that next class yeah we haven't talked about isolation levels

yet [snorts] another cool trick you can do is this little hint which I know works in postgress I I don't I forget what's in the SQL standard um but a bunch of systems support this it's called skip locked basically you say run my select query and any time that you come across an a a tupil that you can't get the shared lock for, just skip it. Ignore it. Don't have it be part of its output. Right? And this is kind of weird because like you say, oh well that means I could potentially run the same query on the

same data um you know multiple times and actually get different results. Yeah, you can. And for some applications, some scenarios that's okay. So this is common in when you use data systems for or databases for cues like work cues. So you say you have a single queue or here's all the tasks I want the jobs I want to run in my system and you have a bunch of workers outside the system like application code pulling the queue and saying what's the next task I I should I should run. And so when you pull the

queue you don't you don't want to wait for a lock to be released by another worker who's pulling the queue. if they're pulling something out, I'm going to start running it. Like they're going to update the status, say I, you know, job is taken. So you just now with skip lock, you just skip whatever you can't acquire the locks for. And that way you can get the next thing in the queue, which is pretty cool, right? It's a weaker form for update. It just prevents you from seeing things that like um it's

like it's like preventing things you just can't acquire the lock for, right? Whereas for update is trying to force you to acquire the lock when you try to read it. [snorts] All right, before we slip flip flip over to the firebolt talk, um again, two-phase locking or some some some variant of two-phase locking is used in pretty much every single data system around even for the multiverging ones, which we'll cover in in next week. And we talked about how there's different variations, two-phase locking, strict

strong straight two-phase locking. I'll I'll follow up on Piaza about the distinction between strict versus strong and rigorous. Um but we'll follow whatever whatever's in the textbook. And we showed how to deal with deadlocks either through detection or prevention. And then we showed how to you can acquire different locks as different levels in the hierarchy. We didn't talk about nested transactions. We didn't talk about save points more detail. We can go over that more next class. Next

class we'll spend more time talking about the sorry we'll spend talking about optimistic concurrency protocols whereas two-phase locking is a pessimistic one and we'll see variations of that and then that'll lead us into multi-versioning and then we'll bring up the thing that they mentioned about different isolation levels where you can actually run it at sort of you you run at lower you run the transactions with lower guarantees about about the anomalies that we're trying to avoid

with serializability. >> Okay, question. Yes. question is can this produce in results? Yes. So you [snorts] wouldn't want to do it for your regular application. It's like for certain scenarios like pulling a queue where I don't care about the things I can't get access to. I only care about, you know, fresh things. This this does that. >> This is Ben. As I said, he's German, uh, and the good kind. Uh he he's from TU Munich. He's he was a protege of Thomas Morgan which is one of the best database

researchers in the world. And now he you started you VP engineering at age like 24 right? >> Um no I'm 26 now. So >> no when you started at firewall. >> Uh when I started at firewall I was like 22 I think. >> Even very impressive. The Germans are very good. This is Ben. He's very smart. Go for it. [laughter] >> Thank you for the kind introduction Andy. you're being too nice. Um, cool. So, I know all of you learned about uh kind of query planners over the last

couple of weeks and we thought maybe it's interesting to you to get our industry perspective uh on query planners and very specifically cardality estimates. So, we decided to talk uh title the talk be weary of cardality estimates. And one thing that I think is important context um wait a second I can't skip slides right now. Oh, something broke on my end. Ah, perfect. Is that whenever you build a query optimizer, it's really important important to put it in the context of the workload you're going to run in the

system, right? Like different types of database systems will require different types of optimizers. Um, and so I wanted to tell you a bit about the workloads we care most about running at Firebolt. First of all, it's an analytical database and it's scale out. So it's postquest compliant but we usually run on terabytes of data, pabytes of data and in many cases customers build basically missionritical real-time applications on top of firebolt. So what that means is that individual queries

need to run really really quickly. We're talking about tens of milliseconds, maybe hundreds of milliseconds if they touch more data and there's very high concurrency. So we have cases where you have maybe thousands of QPS, hundreds of QPS. Um and usually as I said these workloads are mission critical. Now the other thing which is quite interesting about these workloads is you usually have pretty predictable and repetitive query patterns. Think about someone for example I don't know building out like a

customerf facing observability solution that gives metrics into their application. You will see the same types of dashboards over and over again. Maybe our customer has 10,000 customers or 100,000 customers looking at that application, but fundamentally it's the same dashboards being run over and over again. If we run these workloads and we have predictable and repetitive query patterns, we must have predictable query performance. Kind of this is the most important thing for us and this is ultimately what our customers pay us for

and what they expect from our service given that for them firebolt is a mission critical piece of infrastructure. And so now the question becomes when you're building a database in industry or also in academia, what can actually make SQL performance unpredictable? And there's a few things you might think about right away. So maybe the ingestion pattern changed, right? Like they are ingesting three times as much data now, four times as much data and queries are just becoming heavier. The reality is this doesn't

usually happen, especially when kind of customers of ours are building out their mission critical production workloads, they take great care to make sure that things are very predictable, right? Is we're usually working with platform engineering teams, infrastructure engineering teams. they are experts on running data infrastructure and they are making sure that their ingestion patterns are very predictable. Now the other thing you might say is maybe query patterns are changing here as well. This

doesn't usually happen. So with agents running SQL queries it's actually a bit different and there's a lot of interesting things happening there right now. At least for this talk kind of let's skip that part and focus on more maybe traditional workloads which in our case often have predictable query patterns. you're not you're just never in a situation where you see a query pattern that you haven't seen before. It doesn't happen. The other thing that might happen is a

load spike, right? Okay, there's now 10,000 users signing into the application. Everyone wants to look at their customerf facing data app. Now, this does happen. It doesn't happen that often, but when it happens, there are safeguards you should just build into your systems. It's not rocket science. First of all, you should have a robust queueing system. Um, and you should also have autoscaling, right? You should be able to basically handle the low spike by provisioning more compute. Um, and

just getting through that backlog that may be built up. Now, the last thing is maybe you overengineered your system and you thought you're really making it better. And in our experience, that's actually usually what's happening. Um, and so you're kind of taking a component kind of you think you're building this amazing algorithm kind of making it super smart, but ultimately you're maybe making it very smart and is helping in 90% of cases, but you're also making things very unpredictable.

And this is especially important for query planners because fundamentally your query planner can do the most good in your database systems. Having a good planner maybe gives you a 100x a thousandx query performance improvements in many cases. That's very hard to do with just having a faster database runtime for example. However, if you have all of that power and you can do the most good, usually you can also do the most hard. And now for the remainder of the talk, let's actually touch through what that means for the way

we're building our query planner at Firebolt. Now ah by the way one thing I wanted to mention is just now at VLDB 2025 uh there was the test of time award given to the paper how good are query optimizers really and you can already see in the abstract basically that they're saying cardality estimates can be wildly off uh and that makes query plans a lot worse for many systems. This is a great paper to read again just got this great award at VLBB uh so take a look at it. Um, all right, moving back

to Firebolts world. So, our planner is Postgress compliant. Um, however, we actually don't have Postgress code inside of it. So, that's an important distinction. Even though dialect wise we're compliant with Postgress, it's basically built from scratch all in C++. We modeled a lot of things after Cali. Um, and if you look at the core optimization stack, there's at this point, I think more than 170 rules that do rule-based optimization, right? Filter push down, kind of expression

optimization, uh, removing redundant aggregates, removing redundant joins, all of the things you learned about in the last couple of classes. Um, and one set of rules we're especially proud of is I think we did a great job building rules that eliminate redundancy in machine generated queries. And we for example just published a paper at BTW this year. Uh if you if you want to read more about that and learn about some maybe interesting industry rules in industry systems. The other thing we're doing is costbased

join reordering. So this is bottom up using a join graph using dynamic programming. Uh I think you learned about that at the end of last week. And all of this works on iceberg tables as well which is just an important thing to point out. Iceberg is becoming mainstream. Kind of every good modern analytical database system should have great iceberg support and we've done a lot of work wiring iceberg throughout our query planner. Now what does this mean in terms of kind of being weary of cardality estimates?

And usually when we onboard an engineer into the planner team kind of this is the slide I would show them and this is the thing I would talk them through. First of all for us predictable query plans are more important than finding the perfect plan. I would rather have a plan that is not perfect but very predictable and where a user can really rely on very consistent performance for their production workload. Now if we don't always find the perfect plan, we want to give users control. And this is

something we've been actually working a lot on over the course of this year. At this point, we allow users to fix a specific join order. We allow them to fix their distributed aggregation strategy, whether there should be a pre-agregation or not. and and we have a few other levers as well that we give to our customers if they really want to force a specific query plan. The other rule is avoid using cardality estimates at all cost. Our rule is basically we only use cardality estimates for join ordering because the

payoff can be that big. Right? This is what I meant earlier with if you get cost your join ordering right, it can easily be 100x or a,000x. But we think in most other places using cardality estimates is not worth it. Um and does more harm than good. And one last thing and this is actually important to think through. You'll probably have to solve the same problem on iceberg one day. And the reality is you have a lot of control on your managed formats over what statistics you collect. With iceberg

things are becoming a lot harder. In many cases you really only have the table row count. If we look under the hood of Firebolt, I wanted to share one really simple example with you that actually shows how hard all of this gets. So here we're doing a join between two iceberg tables. One iceberg table is 70,000 rows. That's the one on the right side, the build side of the join. And one iceberg table has 5 billion rows. That's the events table to the left. Um and that's on the probe side. Now the iceberg scan to the

left on the large table is filtered and we have this filter called tracker equals RB080. Now the question is what cardality estimate do we actually put above this filter if we only have the base table row count from that iceberg table? And to give a concrete example basically we want to estimate the selectivity of this tracker filter. And the intuition here often is if you have a lot of rows, you probably have more distinct values. And there's this well-known SQL Server formula, which is basically a magic

number or kind of a formula someone came up with um that gives you the selectivity. And if you apply this formula, you get 70,000 rows as your cardality estimate. Now this is terrible because this is exactly the same estimate as you have on the other table which basically means that if the tables change a bit and you have some inserts happening uh your plans will start flapping like crazy. You insert a few rows to the right, put that on the build side, insert a few rows to the left, put that on the build side. And one thing we've

been working on over the past couple of months and that's kind of making its way into production right now is actually we're carrying estimation bounds through our plans. And this is also the last slide I want to end with. And I think this is pretty cool and just something you maybe haven't seen so far. We propagate through our entire query plan basically guaranteed lower and upper bounds. What this means is for your base table, we know the exact number from iceberg metadata. We know left side is 5

billion to 5 billion rows. Right side is 70k to 70k rows. And then on the filter on top on the left side we do our basically expected value estimation. let's say based on the SQL server formula, but we also carry that it could actually be between zero and 5 billion rows. And then during join ordering we do traditional costbased bottom-up join reordering but we also do a risk minimization pass and we basically take a look at the join order we chose costbased and if we can guarantee with the bounds that certain tables are going

to be small or certain subplans are going to be small we put those on the build side. And so what this means in our planner, even though we might not be able to estimate the filter, we will always put the small side on the build side, uh the smaller table on the build side just to minimize risk for our customers. Um and so yeah, can if that's one concrete example, we're doing a lot more under the hood. Uh feel free to shoot me an email or whatever. I'm excited to talk about these things. Um

thanks for your attention. [music] Acrobats over [music] the clicks over trash [music] over [music] the [music] fortune maintain flow with the brain. >> [music] [music]

