[music] [music] I'm still ass. [music] [music] >> All right, guys. Let's get started. Round of applause for DJ Cash. Awesome. Welcome back. >> Thank you. >> How'd it go last week? >> Uh, it went it could have been a little better. They're saying I have to pay taxes on my beats. So, >> your tax account says you pay taxes on your beats. >> Yeah. >> Well, I mean, not paying taxes on the beats. You're paying taxes on the money you made with your beats,

>> right? >> Yeah. Well, you got to do that. All right. Yeah, pay your taxes. All right. But it's good again. Good. You're getting back where you need to be in life. All right, guys. A lot to cover and today's lecture is awesome because it's transactions and I get very excited. Uh, so let's jump into this. Um so all right uh for you guys in the class project 3 is coming up this Sunday that's due and we have the special office hours um uh this that should be the 15th not the fifth I'm missing a one

sorry coming up on the 15th this Saturday from 3:00 to 5:00 p.m. in in gates. Uh and again, post on Patiaza post if you have questions or come to office hours. And then I messed up the due date for homework five that was also due the 16th of Sunday coming up. That's been pushed out a week and that'll be due on the 23rd. And grades go piaza and the website should be updated for that. Any questions about project 3? Who here has not started project 3? Okay. And I should I'll post this too.

If you are concerned about your your buffer pool manager or from project one or your B+ tree from project two not being completely thread safe, just put a latch in front of it, right? Put a global latch in front front of the entire page table and you know what's that? Yeah, but like the the things that will slow you down for project three uh will be like transactional like the lock manager stuff, not the not like the page table latch, right? Other questions or comments about project 3? All right. And then for database talks

after this class today, we have the the co-founder from Moon Cake. It was a database startup uh that had extensions for Postgress that could read iceberg tables. That's been uh they got acquired by data bricks. So that guy's giving a talk. Tomorrow as I posted on on Piaza, we're having one of the co-founders of DBT flying in from Philadelphia. So, he's giving a talk at noon uh on the eighth floor in Gates and there'll be pizza at that and then there'll be an info session for hiring and internships

with him uh at 2:30 also in 8115 and I'd post that on Piaza. Again, you know the RSVP for that. Just show up, talk to the guy. Um and then the Firebolt guy is Ben who gave a talk with us on Wednesday. I said he was giving a talk today. I was wrong. It's Moon Cake, but he's coming back to give a talk uh in the center series a week from today. Um and that'll be on Zoom. Okay. All right. So, last class we talked about current protocols and in particular we talked about uh two-phase

locking. We said this was a protocol that data sets can use at runtime to allow it to schedule the behavior or the ordering of transactions uh in such a way that you can you can guarantee serializability, right? And we said this was a pessimistic protocol where the the data systems assumes the transactions are going to have conflicts. Therefore, it requires them to acquire locks in in different modes on the objects that they were going to access before they're allowed to access them. Right? And we showed different

variations of of of two-phase locking, right? And in most systems, they're going to implement the strong strict one where you just end up holding all the locks to the very end. So, in the two-phase locking two-phase locking protocol, as I was saying, it's it's a it's a pessimistic approach again. So, you're going to assume transactions are going to conflict. Um, but if you assume that they're not going to conflict and that most of the transactions are not going to interfere

with each other and most of your transactions are going to be pretty fast, pretty quick, right? Think of like loading a web page. That's basically a transaction. Like you're going get some queries, get a small amount of data, and then you're done real quickly. Like in the order of of milliseconds, right? It's rare that transactions will take more than a second on modern systems, right? or minutes or hours, days, worst case weeks, right? They were more common in the old days. Sometimes they're

common because you have to do like big bulk updates, but most of the transactions don't look bad. The majority of transactions that are executing the world are going to be pretty fast. So therefore, if you assume these these properties about transactions, you assume that they're not going to conflict and you assume they're going to be pretty fast, then an alternative protocol might be to not require them to acquire locks. let them do whatever they want to do and then at the end when they go to commit figure

out whether there was actually a conflict okay because you assume most of the times there won't be and therefore you'll be faster off than you would have been in a pestmic approach like two-phase locking sound plausible so that's what today is about today is about optimistic protocols and these are sort of fall under the umbrella umbrella of what I call time stamp ordering concurrency protocols and the idea is that rather than using locks to enforce the ordering of the operations with the

new transactions. We're going to use timestamps to keep track of the order in which these things occur uh or should occur. And then when transactions go to commit, we need to make sure that the uh we we generate timestamps for these transactions or the operations are ordered in some kind of time stamp sequence uh in such a way that it's equivalent to executing the transactions in serial order, right? where you you have TI TJ TI is going to execute all its operations first followed by TJ but

again when this con protocols I can actually interle their operations where they don't actually have to physically occur you know immediately one after another they can actually uh be intertwined so the way we're going to make this work is that we're now going to maintain these timestamps for uh not only the the the the transactions as they're actually doing operations in the data system we're actually sorry in within the database we're also going to maintain timestamps for the database objects that

are in our database. And again, we're being vague here. We're not saying whether it's a tupil or a page or a table or or or a database. It doesn't matter. The protocol still works. But now, we're going to keep track of the time stamps of of every for every single object in our database. What like when were they accessed, when were they modified, who was the last transaction, what time stamp they modified. We're going to maintain all that internally. We'll see next class how we actually can

in some systems we we can in SQL we can see these things uh in the case of postgress it'll it'll expose it to you but it's not so it's maintaining this information for you but it's not always uh they don't show it normally when you see queries because you at the end the end day the end of the day the application programmer should know about these these timestamps but underneath the covers we're going to use them to keep track of a uh keep track of things right remember in the beginning we

talked about how like uh pages have headers and tupless headers, right? This is in that header. That's where we're going to start storing these timestamps. All right. So, now the questions be, all right, how do we generate timestamps? >> Satellites. >> So, sat say they're saying satellites. Two systems do that. But we'll we'll get there. But what when you say satellite, what is a satellite giving you? >> Well, what kind of time? >> Wall clock. >> Right. All right. So we're getting ahead

of ourselves. So for a given transaction TI, we're going to say that it's going to be assigned a unique unique fixed time stamp where those timestamp domain is always increasing in value. Meaning like you can never have a transaction show up in the future that has a time stamp that's less than one that that executed before. You have to deal with wraparound when the number gets really big. But if you use a 64-bit integer, then you know it's going to take a while. And so the the the different protocols

that are out there will assign these timestamps to transactions at different time uh or different points of their execution. So the protocol we're going to talk about today, it's not you're not going to get a time stamp till you actually commit at the end. You don't get one at the beginning. In the case of something like Postgress, the way they do uh concurrent protocol, their current protocol, which we'll discuss next class, you're actually going to get two timestamps. one beginning, one of the end, right?

But for today's class, we're assuming we just have we just have one time stamp. So, they were jumping ahead a little bit and saying like, oh, we can get this uh we can get these time stamps from satellites. But again, what you're really getting is what I call a system clock or a wall clock, right? An actual physical time that's like that we keep track of as humans. And typically, you you want to use UTC because you're not worried about daylight savings, right? that you don't want to have the the

clock roll back and now your your your time stamps are now in the past. That's going to mess everything up, right? So, daylight saving screws things up and you want to use UTC. Doesn't have to be coming from the uh from the wall clock getting from a satellite GPS satellites or getting it from an atomic clock. We'll see that later when we talk about Google Spanner that gives you really accurate time stamps. But there's only two systems that that use that kind of thing. DSQL from Amazon that just came

out and the guy gave a talk last class or sorry there's the advanced datab class happening at the same time as this class the the dsql guy gave a talk and it's on YouTube I'll post something else about this right it could just be also a logical counter right you could just say you know increment a counter by one and every time a new transaction go comes along you just add one to it right problem with that one we'll see this when talking about distributed systems like how do you make

sure that like your counter is in sync with another node's counter you can't so typically sometimes you can do a hybrid of these things right but in general for our purposes is here today. Just assume that there's timestamps, assume that they're unique, and assume that they're always increasing in time and that we're never going to go, you know, magically back in time with these things. In Postgress, uh, by default, their time stamps are 32-bit integers. So, you wrap around eventually, and that causes

problems. So they we'll talk about this next class how you handle this but like post explicitly has to deal with like the the the 32-bit number wrapping around and now you you have a bunch of time stamps that are in the past even though logically they're in the past but physically they're in the future and this idea of logical time physical time will come up today. All right. So again today we're going to talk about optimistic certio protocol which is the the the primary protocol

the most common protocol people use in a timestamp ordering uh database system. And again the confusing part about this is that the the protocol's name is the optimistic concurrency protocol. It is in the category of optimistic concurrency protocols but you just say OCC and everyone will know what you're talking about. And then we'll talk about at the end how we're going to handle additional anomalies that we did that we're not going to be able to handle out of the box at least. So far what we

talked about in twobased locking in OC uh and how some systems might be okay with with these additional anomalies and we can run at lower isolation levels to get better performance. Okay. All right. So the the original optimisticio protocol that was based on time stamps uh it's called OC. Uh, and the basic idea is that when transactions run, the database system is going to create a private workspace for them, like a little little area in memory where they're going to store all the the things that they read and write from the

database. So anytime I'm going to read something in the database, I'm going to make a copy of it first in the sort of the global database that all the transactions can read from and I'm going to copy it into my private workspace and therefore I can make changes in that private workspace. uh and no other transaction can see those changes. And then when it come time to commit now we got we have to go look at the other transactions that either have run in the past or are running right now depending

how we want to do this. And we have to see whether they have read or written to anything that we have potentially modified or read in our private workspace. And again, depending on the on the way we're going to do this validation step, we will um we we will we'll end up maybe we maybe be allowed to commit or we may have to kill ourselves and retry. But the key idea is that this private workspace part is where we can do all our changes in like a private scratch base and no one can see them.

So two-phase locking was invented at IBM in 197 sorry 1976 at uh IBM working system R. OC was embedded in 1981 here at CMU. Um there was a and but the inventor HT Kong he's not a database person he was a networking person uh but he came up with this protocol for uh for for interacting with databases right I think it's a it's a very famous paper written by a non-dabatase person um of course at the end of the day what do you need a network for to talk to a database right so it makes sense that they they were

looking at these things right the whole point of a network is so you can talk to databases um all right so the the protocol is going to have three phases and again because he's a networking person that the the names of the phases might be a little weird. Uh but just bear with me. So in the first phase is called the read phase and despite the name read you actually can do reads and writes but this is where you the data system creates the private workspace at the beginning for this transaction and

anything that it that it writes will have to be stored in this private workspace. Anything that it reads you don't have to copy it into your private workspace. But if you want to guarantee that you have repeatable reads, meaning if I read the same thing over and over again, I want to see the same value, then you put make a copy into your private workspace. All right? And then when you complete all your read and write operations and the transaction calls commit, then you automatically switch into this

validation phase. And this is where the data system is going to figure out, all right, and is this transaction allowed to commit? and and based on whether it would it's applying the changes would would uh violate a time stamp ordering that is equivalent to a serial ordering of the transactions right and I'll go through examples of what how how we're going to do this and then if you pass the validation phase then you enter the right phase where the the transaction is allowed to apply its

changes that are in its private workspace into the global database And we're kind of be hand waving how we're going to do this right face, but obviously you want this to be atomic because you want all your changes to to appear once. So, you know, one way to do that is put a global lock on the entire thing. But for simplicity, we'll do that. But in in real systems, you wouldn't do that, right? So then when you if you pass also if you pass the validation phase, I say this when you when you enter the

validation phase, that's when you get a time stamp. Then if you pass the validation phase, all the objects that you get modified are now assigned a right timestamp for this transaction that that you got that it got during the validation phase. So you don't get your time stamp when you start. You get the time stamp when you hit the validation phase. And then if you succeed that then you're allowed to go update the global database with your the time stamp you got during the during the the you know

in the commit process. So the read phase which we'll focus on first this is basically where all the work happens for the transaction. Then everything else is is the commit protocol that you're making sure that things are allowed to happen or things will happen in the order that it should happen. That's equivalent to a serial ordering. All right. So let's look at a schedule now. We have two transactions T1 T2. T1's going to read on A, write on A, and then read A again. And T2 is just going

to do a read on A. And so I'm showing the boundaries here for the three phases. Read, validate, and write. Again, just like in the the lock and unlock stuff in two-phase locking, you don't explicitly call this in your application code. I'm just showing you the boxes to say where the boundaries are for these phases. So when the uh and so also too now in our in our database now we have the it's a key value pair. So an object and a value like a and the value is 1 2 3 and then we have this right time stamp that

corresponds to the last committed transaction that wrote that that value. In this case here assume there was another transaction t0 that got time stamp zero and therefore the right time stamp for this for this object in the database is zero. And again and we have the three phases here. All right. All right. So, our transaction T1 starts. All right. Soon as we call begin, we enter the read phase and then we create this private workspace that has nothing in it right now. Then when it wants to read object

A, assuming we're going to copy everything to our workspace, uh because we want to have repeatable reads, it's going to copy the the current value of A, the entire tupil, and put it into a private workspace. Now there's a context switch. T2 starts running. So again, we it enters the read phase. we we create the uh the workspace for it and then when it reads a again we copy the latest version or the the the we copy a from the global workspace into the um into its sorry in the global database into

its workspace then now it goes to commit so now we enter the validate phase validation phase so this is when that again the data system assigns time stamp to the transaction so t2 is committing first so it's going to get time stamp one so now we're going to run this validation protocol to see whether this thing has uh read or written to anything else that that any other active transaction could have modified or also read. In this case here, T2 read a T1 read a but hasn't hasn't written to it

yet. So therefore, there's no conflict and T2 is allowed to commit. So when we enter the right phase, there's nothing for us to do because there's no modifications in the private workspace. So we we just blow it away and we're done. And now we context switch back over to T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T1. T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T1 does a write on A. So in this case here, uh, we're going to

update in our private workspace with the new value, but now we're going to set the right time stamp to infinity just to say that this is something that we've modified, but we don't have a time stamp yet because we don't get one for our transactions until we enter the validate phase. So then now reads a and again go read this the the same record that it modified in its private workspace. So again that guarantees repeatable reads. Then then now now it enters the validation phase. It gets it's assigned

time stamp t2 checks to see whether there's any conflicts. There isn't because there's no other actual transactions. So now when it enters the right phase, it then applies the time stamp it was given to it uh in in the validation phase into its private workspace for the object that it modified. So this it got time stamp two. So now sets right time stamp to this object in the private workspace to two. And then it pushes the change up into the global database. Yes. after. >> The question is why is the time stamp

assigned at the validation phase after you've done everything rather than when the transactions started because you don't know that the the you don't know what the logical ordering should be before all the transactions finish. So in this case here T1 started before T2 did, right? So physically T1 started before T2, but T2 logically committed before T1 does. So therefore it has a lower time stamp. So put getting it at the beginning doesn't make a difference here. Getting at the beginning would restrain you to

make sure that the ordering of the operations for the transactions match the time stamps you were given when they show up and that limits parallelism. >> What's that? >> The statement is um because we assign it when they validate that it gives us more flexibility to get better parallelism. Yes. Other questions? All right. So, you know, this is obviously a simple example, but again, this reemphasizing the same point I was just making that like physically T1 started before T2 did, but logically T1

T2 committed before T1 did. That's why T2 has a time stamp in the past from T1. And it makes sense, right? Because T1 wrote to A. It wrote to A after T2 committed, right? If T2 came, if T2 would have committed after T1 did, then it should have seen that right on A. But it didn't. Again, that's why getting the time stamp later rather than the beginning ensures you can, you know, allows you to get that that that allows you to order the things in a way that's still correct. Even though it's not the same order in

which they arrived, but it is still equivalent to a serial ordering. And as we said last class or two classes ago that that's correct. That's our that's our metric for correctness. >> So the the question is uh is this protocol going to handle the memory overhead of having to make all these extra copies? I mean if you if you have to update a billion things then you have to update you know to make a billion copies in this protocol. we'll see next class in in MVCC where you can basically take diffs of

the changes you make and those will be much smaller but again I can back all my intermate results in my buffer pool and if they get swapped out to disk that's okay because I can always bring them back in yes >> the question is uh the question is how do you make sure this is happening atomically so like I'm showing one tuple getting written I can do that pretty easily atomically. What do I have to update? Multiple tables, multiple pages. We'll come to that in a second. The original protocol from 1981 just had

a single latch lock in front of everything, right? >> I think so. Yes. Uh yes, for all of them. Uh because again, think back then there wasn't you didn't you had one core on your CPU. It's not like you had a bunch of threads active. Um there's other tricks a way to get around that like but it'll make more sense when we do MCC but I'll talk a little about that in a second. Yeah, there's other tricks you can do like you can you can make sure that when you do the validation if

you have parallel you have multiple workers doing validation in the same phase that they're all going in the same lexographical ordering of the keys. So if I updated key ABC and you updated key key ABC then I'm going to check A then B then C and you'll go in the same order. So that way like you're not checking B and you need to check A and I'm checking A. >> Yes. Yes. The statement is you need a fairness guarantee. Yes. That's outside the scope of what we're talking about

here today. All right. So the read phase is repeating what I already said. Right. So we're going to track the rewrite set of all the transactions. Uh and anytime they want to modify something uh again we're not doing inserts and deletes. We're just doing updates right now. Anytime I want to update something I'm going to do it in my private workspace. And so if I want to have read peral reads, I want to make sure that I copy everything I'm going to read also my private workspace as well. So that way

that when I go read it again, I'm guaranteed to see the same thing. We'll see multi version control next class. This is where having two timestamps can help you because now you can say not only the time stamp of uh was this thing modified since I started and then if it was, what's the time stamp of when when it was last considered the latest version? so I can figure out where I land in my ranges. Again, I'm jumping ahead of myself, but that's where the two time stamps helps helps us the

things. The other thing I haven't talked about also too is like in here I'm just all right, it's a bunch of boxes in PowerPoint, obviously in a real system, you have indexes. So, how do I make sure that if I'm updating something and I'm going to go read it again, I can do this efficiently and because if I go check the the global index of this table, it's it's going to point to the database at the top, not to my private workspace. So a little extra little extra metadata I

got to keep track of like okay if I'm looking for A on this table I actually have a copy of it. Don't check the the don't check the BL stream but we can ignore that for now. All right so the real magic happens with the validation phase. Right. This is how we're going to enforce that the ordering of the operations within our transactions end up matching a or equivalent to a serial ordering. Right. And it so related to what what they brought up in the original protocol it was all serial

validation meaning like I can only have one transaction in the validation phase at any given time. If I now have to have multiple transactions validating becomes more tricky because if there's potential deadlock issues I'm taking latches on these right sets and readwrite sets all the different private workspaces. It starts to get expensive but it's the overall high protocol doesn't change. It's just I I need I need more machinery to make sure that I have uh I don't have uh race conditions and other problems.

All right. So, there's two ways to do validation. And if your system is going to implement OCC, you do one of these two. And at a high level, they're the same, right? In the end, you're checking to see you're for each transaction, you're trying to see, can I am I allowed to commit? And the question is, are you looking back in time or forward in time to see whether you potentially have a conflict? So with forward validation the idea is that you're going to check to see whether you the transaction that's

trying to commit whether your readr set has a conflict with any other active transaction running in the system right now because you can peek in their readr sets. know what things are looking at. You see, have I modified something that some transaction uh has read and I'm trying to commit now and I'm going to be in the past or that transa other transactions could be in the future and it's going to miss my right and then again that would violate serial ordering. Backward validation uh is where you go

to see whether there's a read or write that was made by a transaction that has already committed in the past and that you missed it like you didn't read their changes and therefore again that would violate the ser ordering because now you you're traveling back in time and seeing the state of the database as it was before that other transaction committed and you miss that read. So the second one is the most common one, right? Any system that's implementing OTC, including the DSQL

stuff that we just mentioned from Amazon uh and a couple other famous systems, they're going to be doing this the second approach because it's easier because I just go check to see what's the readr set of any transaction in the last you certain certain time range or something. Uh or I check the time stamp of the latest version of the transaction and see whether it's uh it's in the future from when I'm trying when I when I read it. And therefore I know I would have uh I have a conflict. But I want to

go through forward validation just because that'll again really clearly shows you the idea of things may physically happen in different order in which they're may physically happen in a different order than we than the logically way the logical way we want to store this in the database. All right. So as we already said when a transaction enters the validation phase the the data system is going to assign it a time stamp. those time stamps are always going forward uh increasing in time. And then now we're going to check

the the the the for the the transaction that's trying to commit in the validation phase. We're going to check the rewrite set of all the other active transactions in the system. Again, for simplicity, assume they're they are just in the read phase, right? They're not in the validation phase. In the validation phase, again, you you do same check or simplicity, we'll keep keep them separate. So we're going to say that the time stamp for our transaction uh if it's less than any other transaction

that's still running which again if you don't have a time stamp then it's infinity so you're definitely less than them then one of the three following conditions must hold in order for you to pass the validation phase and say your transaction is allowed to commit. So the first one's pretty easy pretty easy to understand. So say your t T1 T1 wants to commit and so the first check has to be if my time stamp is less than the other transaction's time stamp and again if it hasn't been assigned one

it's infinity then if my transaction is going to complete its validation phase before the other transaction has even started then then it's safe for me to go ahead and commit. So T1 starts does whatever changes makes whatever changes it wants in the validation phase then it hits the validate sorry in the read phase then it hits the validation phase and T2 hasn't started at all. So it can't possibly conflict because T2 hasn't read anything in the database. It just hasn't started.

So it hasn't if I make a bunch of changes it'll see it the transaction the second transaction will see it when it starts. So this one's pretty obvious, right? It's basically saying it guarantees this is it's a serial ordering. Uh I say also too for this one I'm showing two transactions. If if you had like you know hundreds of transactions again the rewrite set is empty they haven't done anything then then this is trial to do as well. All right, the next more complicated one is if again T1

wants to commit. If the if T1's going to complete its right phase before T2 starts its right phase and T T1 doesn't modify anything that's been read by T2, then then it then the there's no conflict and it's safe to commit T1. Another way to say think about is like T1 makes a bunch of changes, T2 read a bunch of stuff. If I take the intersection of those two sets, if it's if it's the the empty set, then I know there's no conflict, right? And what this is doing, this

preventing a transaction in the future from reading an older version of an object that we modified. Yes, the question is why why are we not looking at the red set? That's case three, we're building up. It's a simple one is like I you haven't started running yet. No conflict. This one is you have starting running yet, but you didn't read anything that I wrote to. So no conflict. Third one will handle the right conflicts, right? Okay. So T1 starts, right? We create the workspace. It does a read on

A. Copy that workspace does a write on A, right? We update that in our workspace. Then now T2 starts running and it does the read on A. And then so then now when T1 wants to go commit, we're going to check the the the right set of T1 with the reset of T2. In this case here, we have a conflict because T2 read the object with with at time stamp zero, but now we're trying to write a new version of it at a future time stamp that's going to be greater than zero. So if T2 was really being

executed in serial ordering where it would have it would execute after T1 committed then it would have read whatever the version is. I don't use the word version but would would have read the the value at the time stamp that T1 is going to install but it hasn't right. So therefore T1 has to abort even though T2 hasn't touched anything. So it's not not a right conflict right? But it read something in it read it read something in the past that it shouldn't have seen because it would should be

executing in the future. >> The question is why not kill T2? T2 didn't do anything wrong. It's your fault, right? >> Say it again. >> So his comment is like T1 did a bunch of stuff. T2 barely has done anything yet. Isn't it better to uh allow is it would it be better to kill T1 sorry T2 and that instead of rolling back the changes of T1? Uh would that still be correct? I mean for serial ordering you could play that game when you start doing parallel ones then you like you and I

conflict and now we need to coordinate who's going to die, right? It's just easier to kill yourself. It's like the latching stuff with the the be tree. How do you decide? All right, the statement is in my example here, I said that the the the ordering of the transactions has to be one where if T1 has a lower lower time stamp than T2, then that's the zero ordering. But in my example here, where my black arrow is, think of the black arrow is like the program counter. T2 does not have a time stamp yet. It's

infinity, right? So at this point here, T2, T1 is going to get time stamp one. Uh, and one is less than infinity. So T1 occurs logically before T2 does. In this we're at the moment where I'm pointing at the black where the the black arrow is. >> The question is what's it what's the benefit of using time stamps versus what using values? >> Uh yeah. So their statement is why do I want to why even bother just looking at these time stamps rather than just seeing just comparing the values and

seeing that they're not the same. Because the value like comparing time stamps is cheap you know 2 64 integers that's a single instruction. If I have these huge strings I got to do diffs on them that way. >> Yes. >> Can you what? Sorry. >> Live lock in this case. >> Okay. >> Oh >> yeah. >> Yes. So, so this their statement and they are correct that in a highly contentious system where there's a lot of conflicts, you may end up just burning a bunch of

uh cycles trying to do a bunch of work on transactions and then only find out that you don't commit. You're not going to be able to commit till the end. So, you did a bunch of waste work. Absolutely. Yes, you could do that. So, in that case, you know, the pessimistic protocol of two-based locking would be better. So we we this this work we've done some research was about 10 years ago. We basically tried every single protocol at like extreme scale like 10,000 or a thousand cores and in the end if everyone's trying to

update the same key they're all it's all the same like you get one transaction at a time right basically becomes a serial ordering. So if you have light contention this will be better than two phase locking a little bit more contention two-phase locking will be better but then extreme contention they're all the same. So now there are some academic systems that try to be clever and say uh to try to measure how much contention you have and can dynamically switch or adapt what commercial protocol they're using. They

switch OC or two locking based on the workload. No real system implements that because it's so hard to do one of these. Now you got to do two of them. No way. Yeah. No, no one's going to touch that from engineer perspective. All right. So again with forward validation we're going to make sure the basic idea is that we want to make sure that transactions don't miss changes that they should have seen if we were following along in in the in the proper serial ordering right so T2 when it

committed should have seen the update that T1 did right but it missed it because it it read the global database before T1 installed the the change in the global database. Therefore T1 is not not allowed to commit. So an easy fix for this would be uh just you know changing the schedule. T1 starts right does a read on a write on a uh that that all goes in it private workspace then now t2 is going to start does the read on a then it enters the validation phase. So again at this point here even though

it's the same workload just the ordering in which they're doing validation has now changed right so the same operations right but in physically they're occurring the same way but logically the validation for T2 is occurring before the the validation for T1 so T2 checks have I read anything that uh that has been has been modified by any other transaction again we're only checking for whether I modified something that somebody else read not whether I read something that somebody else modified or

sorry that I read something I did not read something that somebody else modified. So again T2 is occurring logically in the past. So it's allowed to read the older version of A and allowed a commit. Then now when T1 does its commit the validation it's allowed to commit because logically the update to object A is occurring after T2 had committed. So physically the update happened before but it went was in the private workspace that nobody could see but then now when I go to commit want to

install it it's okay to happen uh this is allowed to happen because T1 sorry T2 was in the past and didn't wouldn't have seen my change. All right the last one is the the deal with the the right right complex and the re the right read complex that they were mentioning. So again it's basically the same logic again we check to see whether the intersection of our right set with the right set of the other transaction and in and the read set if those are all empty then I know that we we have not

mod any modified anything that they have written to or they have read. So going back here again. So say now uh T1 wants to do a read on A and a write on A. T2 wants to do a read on A and a read sorry read on B and read on A. So in this case here when T t T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T1 goes to commit we'll give it time stamp one, right? We go update its uh it's the right time stamp for it workspace because T2 has not read uh has not physically read A yet. Then there's no conflict allowing

with T allowing T1 to commit. So there's no conflict between the right set here with a read set on disk because this is read B. This is only written to A. So T2 T1 is allowed allowed to commit. We install that change now in the private workspace. Then now when T2 starts running again and it reads A, it's going to read the later the newest version of of A that was modified by T1 T1. And again and this is equivalent to the transactions happening executing in serial order. So it's given time stamp two right

uh and we didn't do any right. So there's there's nothing to install. So we just blow it all away. Make sense? So at a high level again what forward validation is basically doing is you're checking to see whether your right set conflicts with any other transaction that is still actively running even if that transaction has started before you did. But if they're still they're still in the read phase they haven't they haven't started the validation set yet then logically they're they're still

they're going to be in the future of you even though physically they started before you did. So say again T1 is the one that wants to commit. So we care about at this point here in in the timeline the the validation scope is is at the moment that we committed going back in time all the way back to whatever transaction that was that to any transaction that is still active. So you got to keep again keep around the rewrite set of every transaction. So T3 started physically before T1 did but we

can go back in time and look what T3 actually uh actually read. backward validation which is what I say the more common one. This one's easier to implement uh and there's less interference with other transactions running the same like running the same time as you because you're not checking the rewrite sets of transactions that are trying to modify their own rewrite sets. You're just going back and looking what are the other transactions that have committed uh that were that were

least active when I started and committed before I committed. So again the validation scope for that one it would be this range here just for T2. >> Yes. >> I have a question for >> Yes. I'm trying to wrap my mind around like guarantee that when like that's in your previous slide to guarantee that 22 ends it validation phase no one else started reading something that like to me to implement that you kind of need a like stop the world scenario because like what if you compare

yourself with all the other >> and then while you're at the end of the list someone at the beginning of the list like you won't come in or something I don't have to basically stop the world and guarantee that there's not a new >> right so their statement is and they are correct that uh mostly correct like don't I need to make sure that when I when a transaction goes to validate that so you want the validation or the right the right phase with what part like have I gotten past validation yet

>> validation the moment where you make sure that no one else started reading something that you're right >> yes so in if you do serial validation yes simp simplest way is you stop the world right or that you could put hints up and say I'm in the global database or in a posting table somewhere that says I'm about to val I'm trying to validate now here's the things that I've modified so I'm going to go check to see whether anybody else interferes with me but

anybody else that tries to read this the thing I'm trying to validate on wait >> it's also a little bit like when a new transaction come in needs to the statement in the correct that like there's a little bit of backward validation being done by transactions when they start because you have to check to see whether this thing is in in the process of being committed. Yes. Well, that's what I'm saying. So if you assume the transactions are fast and the rewrite sets are small then like

it's a there's a window. Yes. But it's going to be fraction of a millisecond less than a millisecond because you're just checking things in memory. But again if my transaction read for hour ran for hours or days then yeah that that's going to be basically block locking the whole set down to be a single thread executing. Absolutely. Yes. It's unavoidable. MVCC will handle a little bit of that because they'll they'll do is basically the they'll store in the tupil itself the

metadata about what is what's being committed or not. You still have to check there's an actual transaction table to keep track of like here's all the transactions that are still running and you got to go look at them. Uh but like I don't have to check like I like I can get information about whether the current version of the object I'm looking at is the one I should be reading direct by looking the object but without checking a global thing. So that'll be the next class.

Yes. Yeah. So the question is with backward validation I said you have to check all of the transactions that have committed that that committed since I started. Yes. So there would be a transaction table we'll cover next class. There's a basic internal table says here's all the transactions that are that are that are in some state my system. They could either be like like you know waiting to start running like in my read phase, validation phase, write phase and then also like committed but not completely

gone because someone is still depending on the note you know maybe depending on see whether they conflict with them. >> Yes. And in for validation once something commits uh and we pass a validation step then we're done with them. Yes. Yes, I think the answer is yes. check. >> So the question is um uh be very clear when you say check who's check like who's checking and when are they checking? >> So when you try to validate >> you need a list of transactions instead

of just going to the main database and check the time stamps of the objects that depend on. >> Uh right yeah they are correct. So um in this step here why do I get why do I keep track of the transactions that that are around why just check the object that I wrote to or read too red you got to check the reads as well so like uh you why not check every individual tupil versus just checking this like state table I'm mentioning because if the p for correctness for correct reason what you're proposing is still correct

like whether you check the state table the transaction state table or the individual tupils it'll still be correct. It's way faster to go check a single state table, it's going to have all your information because that'll be in memory. Whereas if the tupils that they modified that I go that I read, but I didn't write to. So I read them and maybe they got swapped out to disk. Now I got to go read them again to see whether uh someone has modified them since the last time. Right? We'll see

this in um it sounds like a crazy idea. You're basically trying to say I got to read it twice. Some systems will actually do that. We'll cover that in this class. >> The question is backward validation versus forward validation faster. In the end, I think performance is the same. Uh engineering wise, backward is easier. That's why most of the systems do that because there's less interference with the runtime of other transactions. With backward, I'm just going to see whether things have already

committed. They've already done. So I'm not really interfering with them because they're dead or you know they've they've moved on and most systems implement the the backward one. All right. So then this this one we covered already about like the serial commits and the parallel commits. Again it's it's a bit more complicated. It just you have to make sure things happen in in sort of a in in in the same order. uh and you you acquire latches on the various data structures you're using to

check different things. We've already covered a lot of these points. All right. So the main take away from OC is that this is going to work really great if the number of conflicts are low, right? If all the transactions are read only, then that's the best situation because who cares whether you know I you read you you and I read the same thing because we did so we can commit right away, right? But as I've already said before, if you have high contention, you actually do have a lot of conflicts, then this is

going to perform worse than two-phase locking because in the case of two-phase locking, if I find out I have a deadlock, I'll find out the moment I try to acquire the lock, I won't do a bunch of work and then realize that was a mistake and have to throw all the work away. Now, I may do a bunch of work and then try to get the last lock I need after doing a million things and then get a deadlock and get killed. So you can still have the same problem. But in many cases the or because two base

locking is pessimistic. You can't do things until you get the locks. So if something is high contention, you won't get the lock for it and you don't end up wasting time. The other thing that we'll see next class the big problem with HTC is that copying from the private workspace that sucks. That's a mem copy. That's a terrible thing to do. It's always going to be slow. And in the case of multi version concurrent control, what we'll see is that there's you can basically

like take a diff of things and only copy the things that you actually modify and that can be much smaller because if I have a thousand attributes and I only update one of them and what I'm showing here today, you have to copy all thousand attributes into your private workspace. In the case of uh when we see delta records in MVCC, I just copy the things that I modified. >> What's that? What about repeatable reads? >> The question is what about non-re repeatable reads? Time stamps will fix

that for us next class. >> Yes. So Postgress is basically doing what I'm describing here today. Instead of copying to private workspace, they're going to copy tupils into uh back into another page in the table. >> No, they're using again this is where things get muddy. They're doing multi version control which is gonna look like MPCC but they're using two-based locking to protect things but also predicate locking for serializability. We'll get there in a second. Okay.

All right. So any question about OC before we jump into more stuff because now we're talking about how we handle inserts and deletes because this is where everything we've talked about so far is going to break. We still need it but we need to make it better. So again if it's just updates sorry and and reads that's fine because the the set of the objects the the number of objects in our database is not and tables are not going to change but when we start now having modifications that

can affect the result of queries within our transactions like looking at high level concepts instead of just read and writes then then we have to be then these protocols aren't going to work. So look look at two transactions now where now we're actually going to be doing queries right instead of just doing uh simple reads and writes but again the data systems end of the day is just going to see reads and writes on objects uh but SQL queries is easy to understand. So we have a table of people. We have their ID, a name, and a

status. And so T1's going to start. It's going to run this this aggregation query. It's going to count all the people where the status is paid. Then there's a context switch. All right. And it gets a value 99. Then there's the context switch over to T2. T2 is going to insert DJ cache into the table and set a status to paid. Good job. All right. And then it commits. And again, install our change into the database. Then now T1's going to run again. Run that exact same query, but now the count

of number people paid is 100. Right? So again, this is an unre repeatable read, but it's not unre repeatable in a single object. It's unbeatable in a range of objects. All right? So two-base locking and OC will have this problem. So why does the pro what is the problem? Well, it assume we're doing 2PL for simplicity. The problem is that you can't acquire a lock on something that doesn't exist, right? He wasn't in the database of the table the time the first query ran. So

even though it took a shared lock on everything, right? And again, yes, you can take a share lock on the entire table. Assum it didn't do that. It didn't, you know, it didn't take couldn't take the lock on his record. Therefore, I was allowed to insert a new record with with his information. And then I run the same query. And then now I'm seeing things that that weren't there before, right? And again, if we were running in serial ordering uh of our of our transactions, we shouldn't

have that phenomenon. We shouldn't have that problem. So this is what is called a phantom read, right? Phantom or ghost app, you know, apparition, whatever. The idea that tupils are magically going to appear and disappear and cause us to get incorrect results in our queries. that should not happen if you are running in true serial ordering. Right? So range scan is the most obvious way to think about this. That's something I I read it read a range once uh I don't see there's no value in

there. Then I read it again and now there's a value in there that I didn't see before or the value that I saw before now has been deleted. Right? >> Question. How could another transaction delete it if you hold the show lock on it? uh uh depending on how you're defining the ranges. Keep it simple to write. Yes. Uh just assume that someone inserted something but the ID is the same right or again for two ways locking that that would occur but OC that that could still happen. Okay. So how can we fix this problem?

Yes. Question. uh their question their statement is this phantom problem is because like I'm within one transaction I'm not seeing the same results. Yes. So like if I run and I get 99 and then you run and you get 100 that's okay because again like that insert could should have happened in between my query and your query right and that's equivalent to a serial ordering it's like within one transaction do I do I do are things disappearing okay so how how can we solve this there's four basic categories of

approaches right so the most obvious thing is just lock everything lock the table lock database, lock the pages, whatever. And then that way you can't insert anything into the uh into a range that that I've read, right? If I lock the entire table, you can't do any modifications, uh, you know, problem solved. But again, if I have a billion tupils in my in my table and I'm only reading small ranges, that's probably not a good idea because now I'm locking more things than I

actually need. Another approach is what sort of we we talk about here uh is you just rerun your scan again uh when you commit and see whether you see things that you shouldn't have seen or things have changed. >> How would you know? You got to keep track of your reset. >> They said they said that that's potentially building the rows. Yes. >> Well, we'll come to that in a second. You can do the reverse. all the same again. >> The question is, do I keep track of all

the BS again? >> Yes. >> Or some kind of fingerprint of it or something like that. >> But again, this is what I'm saying like if your if you assume your transactions were small, most transactions are, then this is okay. If I go read your your account record once and then read it again, no big deal. Or I read, you know, the your all your orders, say you bought 10 things on Amazon, you have 10 orders on Amazon, read 10 orders, no big deal. It's not for free, but you have to do

it. >> What's that? >> Not that expensive. Yes. Again, there's no free lunch. And then predicate locking and index locking. We'll cover that in more detail, right? Um so again this is what IBM figured out in in 1970s 1976 like they figured out that the the ordering or try to figure out how to how to do this efficiently uh at least in case of predicate locking is going to be an empty problem or empty hard right rewrite re-executing scans that's easy to do if everything is in memory

everything's fast but again larger things are problematic. So the the the most common of these is going to be the bottom one index locking. We'll see that in a second. Uh the two middle ones are kind of pretty rare. Uh and that for for rex scans you normally see this in in the in memory queries. And then the the one at the top lock everything. Again it's some systems will do it if if you care about serializability. All right. So let's look about reex. So again, you basically track of all the

wear clauses for any any query you run and then you when a transaction commits, you just check to see whether the the output of those those wear clauses match to what you saw when you ran it the first time. So you don't need like if it's if it's a say a select query that computes that aggregation, I don't need to keep track of the aggregation result or whatever computation I'm doing or the joins. I just need to know for all the base tables, what data did I see? Right. So I just run it again and see whether I

get the same result. So Hecaton does this. Uh Dynamo DB and Fauna kind of do the opposite, reverse it. Meaning they run your queries first, but don't make any changes to the database. They call them like reconnaissance transactions. They run your queries and see what it's going to do. Keep track of your your your scan sets. Then you go to commit and then you run then you actually run the queries for real and see whether you match which you which you did when you ran it the first time. If yes, then you

know you got things in in the right order. So you're still doing the the whatever the time stamp ordering or the two-phase locking part when when the the fake transactions run first or the fake queries run first. And then now that I know that I got the right ordering, I if I run them again, if I get the same result since I I I scheduled you in in a in a serializable way the first time, then when I went it for real and I get the same result, then I know it's the same and you're safe to commit

in the back. Yes. Wait, so your setup is you the first transaction is you said long long in time or long in like they're updating a billion things. >> Okay. You updated and then you have another transaction that's really short. >> Yes. >> Yes. Yes. >> Yes. >> All right. So, there's there scenarios. I have transaction T1, it updates a billion things. Transaction T2 while T1 is running comes in, reads something from that T1 modified uh and then then it goes ahead and goes

to commit. Right? That's your setup. If you care about serial ordering or ser serializability, T2 is not allowed to commit until T1 commits because it did a dirty read. It read something that T1 modified and it hasn't T1 has not committed yet. So if you care about ser serializability, then you have to wait. If you don't, we'll cover that in a second. Then you you commit and then you you I mean not you well you as the application programmer deal with whatever the con consequence of that

right data doesn't data did what you did what you told it to do okay uh predicate locking the idea again this this is what they sort of they they were proposed to do in IBM in the 1970s and realized it was super hard to do on the hardware they had at the time and also doing this exactly is is is again MP MP hard. Um the basic idea way think about this is that you're going to maintain this this highdimensional space of all the possible locks you could have in your in your database based on

predicates. So not locks on individual tupils like we did in in two-phase locking where like there's a lock table and I acquire a lock on on you know record one two three right think of it's a a more abstract concept and then I'm going to check to see whether I have uh any of these these these polygons or these these highdimensional objects based that are defined based on my predicates if they intersect then I know I have a conflict in those transactions and then I just do two-face locking whatever to figure the

order in which things should occur where you have to wait or kill yourself or whether I have deadlocks. So again, this is this is obviously very difficult to do if you have a lot of predicates on a lot of tables and so you can approximate this using uh precision locking where you just look at the readwrite sets and you figure out whether there's overlap. So you got to keep doing things around. Um in the case of Postgress and a bunch of other systems, they're going to they're going to approximate this using index locking

which we'll talk talk about in a second. So no one does this exactly because again it's it's kind of too hard too too difficult to do but again you can kind of get away with it using well you can get away with this this precision locking stuff which is basically you look at the rewrite sets and you see whether there's conflict therefore you know the predicates overlap so the only system that does this with precision locking is these German systems and they're all written by one guy right so

cedarb umbra and hyper it's all written by this one guy in Munich um and the the precision locking papers was like from 1983. It had like 30 citations when the German guy found it and it's like this solves exactly my problem, right? And he implements exactly what they're doing here and it guarantees serializability, right? But the the original proposal of predicate locking looked like this. So I have my my predicates uh and my my two queries and I extract out the wear clause and I'm going to map that to some

region in my in this high dimensional space. So for simplicity, I assume that there's only two dimensions. there's the status and and the and the the person, right? So then now for this other one here, uh when I insert this query, that's the same as acquiring a lock on the name DJ cache and the status is paid. And then if I know that the two regions overlap, I know that there's a conflict in their predicates and therefore I have to decide now my protocol who's allowed to acquire the

lock and who's allowed to commit and so forth. Again for two dimensions it's easy but think think of like a table you know 10,000 columns this becomes uh unmaintainable. Yes. >> So, >> precision locking we teach this advanced class on here. The basic gist of this like you look at the rewrite sets of the transactions >> the exact rows. >> Yeah. The exact rows and you just check to see whether like the they're predicates whether you're you're basically running the how is this you're

taking the wear clause of the other query and you're seeing whether it matches any tupils in the rewrite set of the other transactions. You'll see something. You'll see a watered down version of this in in uh project 4, right? But think of like the readwrite set is just another table. So I just run my query that I'm going to run in my transaction on that rewrite set and see whether matches. All right. So most systems are going to do predicate locking. And you can kind of think of this as a special case of

index locking where we're going to use the indexes themselves as the mechanism or the data structure to keep track of what locks are being held. uh by transactions and this will cover the you the values that don't exist yet and allows me to lock them because again I I don't want to have my in my my if I'm doing two-phase locking my lock table I don't want to have a you know entries for for ranges or things that don't exist because that's going to become difficult to maintain and actually

build. So I'm going to use indexes themselves because that's they're already going to have data in an ordered manner and I can use them as the the the way to figure out how how to lock things. So there gonna be four four different approaches and we're going to build up uh and and use start with the basic ones like the the key value locks but then we can combine all these together and include the hierarchal locking that we talked about last time to and to see how we actually implement this in a real

system. >> Yes. >> The question would if you have no index on the keys do you have to fall back to scans? >> How do you what do you >> question how would you lock this? You like lock the entire table. >> Yeah. How do you lock? >> Question is, how do you lock something that doesn't exist? Gap locks. Two slides. All right. So, the most basic one is a key value lock in your index, right? Is where you have a thing that you know it exists, right? And then I can just I can

just take a lock on it, right? And again, you don't store this in the actual B+ node itself. You're going to store this in a lock management. Now you're keeping track of like within this value within this index this this this transaction holds the lock for it right for an exact match for things like infinity right the upper bounds or lower bounds right you can just have virtual keys for those but it works basically the same way right so then now to handle the case he was they they were asking about is how do I

lock things that don't exist well again say that I have now a transaction that wants to insert value 15, right? Between 14 and 16. 15 doesn't exist yet. So, I'm just going to keep track of all the gaps between the keys that I do have in my my index. And then now I can take keys on the gaps or sorry, take locks on the gaps. So, this is going to say I'm going to have a a lock on the the gap between 14 and 16 exclusive. So, again, these are all integers, but say someone inserts like

15.1, 15.2, 2 15.3 all of that would be covered by the single gap lock right if it's integers it's only 15 or any possible value thing of strings I have key aa and key abc I I need a gap between the two of them and the gap lock would handle that but then now I don't want to have to keep track of a or keep maintain uh a lock for every single key value pair that or key that that I want to maintain and every single possible gaps that I may have within a range of values. So now I start combining them together and

take key range locks. So my lock tables I'll basically keep track of like you know here's the starting point 14 inclusive and then the the key range lock goes up to 16 exclusive. So now if anybody wants to insert something in this range they got to go acquire the the key range lock for this that covers the gap and it would tell me whether I'm allowed to to put something something there. So going back to that query I had in the beginning where I'm doing that scan to trying to all find

the people within a status right I could take the key range lock uh from that status equals you know paid up until whatever the next key is including the gap and that'll prevent somebody uh you know another transaction from inserting a value in that range right you can go you can go in either directions typically you in your system you only go one direction you either go to the current key and going backwards in in the ordering or the current key and going forwards but you you only do one. All right. So now we can put this all

together and start do hierarchal locking that we had before. So again, this is kind of different than we talked about before. We were like I was taking locks on tupils and tables and so forth, but now I'm taking locks on actual values and actually within the page itself in in my B+ tree, right? So I can take an attention exclusive lock on a on this sort of range of values within the page, right? And then with inside that now I can take an exclusive lock on the key range from 14 inclusive to 16 exclusive

within the within the gap. But then also I can take an exclusive lock within another transaction can take an exclusive lock on a another key value pair or key key range by taking attention attention exclusive lock which is compatible with the intention exclusive lock that somebody else maintained. Now I can lock 12. So two transactions can come in. Somebody could be updating 12 and somebody could be updating 14 up to the gap. And this will prevent phantoms for me because again, I'm trying to avoid

people inserting something that that you know that didn't exist before because this allows me to take locks on things that that I didn't know about before. Okay. Yes. >> Question is, what does a gap look like? What do you mean like The question is how would you actually implement it? So you just keep track of like uh where here you would keep track of like the the range in which this is being locked. So 14 exclusive to 16 exclusive. So the in the lock table you would keep track of like that that that

interval. And so therefore if anybody is trying to read something they would be scanning along the leaf nodes and say they're finding values. Say, say you don't know the values that are or the keys that are in in the in the in a range before they start before you go read something, you have to go check to see whether you can quiet the lock on to read something. So think of like the BSG email in project two, you got to go check the in the lock manager as you're scanning along leaf nodes.

>> Yes. So if you come in and you intend to modify a gap at the back, do you always lock everything until the end of the page? >> The question is if I intend to insert something into this gap, do I lock from the gap to the end of the page? Uh you would know again at this point you're inside you're inside the page. So you know what the values that are here, right? So you're you know you have it in some kind of read mode. You're reading things. That's okay. So then I'm going

to go check the the lock manager. So I I know what I'm trying to insert or delete, right? So you go check the lock manager. Give me the lock for for the thing I'm trying to modify. And it may be to the end, may may not be. Depends on what you're trying to do. >> But I'm saying you know the you'd have to know the value you're trying to modify in order for it. >> Yeah. But let's say you're trying to insert. >> Yes. that you're going to move 16.

>> So his question is uh if I insert 15 and then now I got to split this node. How about that? The people >> uh you talking about physically within the page. >> I I still have to take a right latch on the page. These are logical locks. So I'm I'm trying to lock the logical values that are stored inside the page. In order for me to modify the page, I have to take a physical latch. Does that make sense? So again, so like the in order for me to physically modify the bytes within a page, I have to have

a right latch on that page. There's another this is what we were separating locks and latches. The the locks are protecting the logical contents of the database. The logical contents are the keys that are stored within a range. I'm using the index as the mechanism to efficiently keep track of that range. But I still have to maintain all the physical correctness using the latches. Lots of hands. Yes. trying to do >> the question is does that mean if I try to do if I'm trying to run serializable

transactions where I don't and I don't have an index on the thing on the ranges that I'm looking at would could that be causing them to be expensive yes it's no free lunch Yes. all the other predicates. >> The question is is try to do syntactic uh is it static analysis of the predicates to see whether you would have conflicts with other um maybe but like the pro like soon as you have like functions inside that thing it it it comes The statement is like, could you just could you do a quick fix? Could could

you quickly try to assess whether you can determine statically through the predicates whether you would have a conflict with other transactions? If if no and it's provably correct, then you're good. If yes, then you fall back to the more heavyweight like if if you can't verify can't verify that they're not going to click. Is there any space? >> The question is, is there any work in the space? Maybe. It's been 50 years since people are trying to trying to do this. So maybe

>> I I just don't know. Yeah. >> Uh questions in the back. Sorry. Okay. I think we covered all this. All right. So now here's the dirty secret. We spent the last three classes talking about how great serializability is, how it's important to, you know, keep track of of of what transactions are doing so you can generate schedules that are serializable. The dirty secret is most databases do not give you serializability by default, right? And in some systems, they'll lie to you.

Oracle famously does this. If you say to Oracle, I want serialize all transactions, it'll come back and say, yep, got it. No problem. It does not give you serializability. Right? It gives you gives you a lower form of of of isolation, right? And so the reason why these systems are not going to do all this extra stuff we've been talking about the last last two classes, like they're still going to do two-phase locking, they're still going to do OC, but all these extra mechanisms I just talked about now to guarantee

serializability. They're not going to do these things because they're expensive. He kept, you know, they kept asking the front row, what if you don't have indexes? How do I do this? You have to you have to do the slow thing and just scan everything. And so by default that's going to suck. If if that's on by default that's going to suck. People are like yeah this database sucks. It's so slow and they're they're going to switch to something else and you know you lose out potential

customers. So that's why default the most data systems are going to run with a lower isolation level. So now the question is what is an isolation level? So an isolation level is going to control the the sort of how aggressive you want the data system to be to ensure your transactions uh don't incur any of the anomalies that we talked about before right dirty reads and repeatable reads loss updates and then the the phantom reads we just mentioned here. So by default serializability make sure

make sure that none of these things happen. But if you run at a lower isolation level you so when a transaction starts you can tell the system run my new transaction but run with lower isolation level you may incur some of these other anomalies. And so what I'm showing here is the the the basic ones that were originally defined in the SQL standard from 1992. And this is assuming you're running in a system that uses two-phase locking. Um, [clears throat] but the highest level is serializable. So you say I want my

transaction on serializable and you're guaranteed to have no phantoms. Everything's repeatable reads and then no dirty reads. The next lowest isolation level is called repeatable reads. And this is where phantoms might happen. But the other three types of anomalies will not will not definitely not happen. Read committed is that you have phantoms potentially unre repeated reads because you read you're reading data from transactions that have have recently committed but maybe you read it

before first an object before they committed and so you see you see the data one way then they commit and now you read it again and because you're allowed to read committed data you you you'll see different values so you may have unre repeatable reads and the read committed is just like you're driving up the seat belt all these anomalies may happen now I'm counting my language here I'm not saying they will happen. I'm saying they might happen because again if I just execute one transaction by itself

and no other transactions that's serializable, right? If one transaction in one schedule with no other transactions is by definition serial. So that's always be serializable. So I'm putting a bunch of may here just to say that like if you run these other isolation levels, you may have these problems depends on whether the other transactions running at the same time that that your transaction is running is reading writing the data that that you're reading and writing to. So now if you do this uh in two-based

locking, how do you actually implement this? Well, again, you just turn off a bunch of the stuff I just spent the last half an hour telling you how to do, right? Again, OCC basically works the same way. But in the case of two-based locking, if I run a strong straight TPL, uh with additional phantom protection by either like re-executing scans, the index locks or predicate locking or whatever, right? then I'm guaranteed to not have any phantoms and and all the transactions will run in serial order or

the equivalent to a serial ordering repeatable age. You just you just don't do the the index locks or the stuff we talked at the end. just do two-phase locking uh strict two-phase locking strong two-phase locking and you're guaranteed to get everything without uh everything but phantoms recommitted you for this one you basically just do 2PL you don't do any index logs or DAP locks the things we talked at the end and then when a transaction uh reads an object you acquire the share lock on it and

then you immediately give back the shared lock you release the share lock again it violates 2PL ordering but um again you're going to get better parallelism because you you can guarantee that other transactions can read data that that you've read uh immediately. You still hold the right locks to your commit and then in read a committed you just you you you just don't take any share locks at all. >> If you if you modify something again it's about what you uh again it's about but what your

transaction cares about. So I want to make sure that I don't have any lost updates. So I I'll hold the right locks until I know I'm not going to write to that transaction anymore. And in case of most systems since you can't supposed to call unlock on a on a excuse lock on a tupil, it's then it's you just hold it to the very end commit. >> Uh the same is you cannot have loss updates for recommitted and below. >> You can >> Yes. So you don't need to >> Yes. Uh

this is hard. Uh if I want to avoid loss updates, I don't want to write something and then not be able to read it. So yes, so so you give up the exclusive locks I think on a recommitted Let me double check this. Yes, [snorts] I again hopefully it makes it clear this is hard. Um uh so again what you define what isolation level you want if you want something other than the default when a transaction starts right and different systems have different different uh different syntax on how to do this right

and then the default is going to depend on what what your system actually provides for you. So this is just a quick survey of a bunch of you know various systems that are out there. Um and you see that there's this little part here right here from you know SQL server my SQL Oracle and Postgress those are the top four database relational database systems in the world right and by default none of them give you serializable by default right case of my SQL gives you my SQL is actually better than the than uh than the others because

it's actually giving you repeatable reads which is higher than >> what's that >> right the question is what is SN isolation that's next class. So when they defined the SQL standard in 1992, they forgot about this multiverging self class and there's a anomaly that can occur with snapshot isolation that doesn't occur with two-phase locking. Uh and the isolation level therefore is classified as different. It's called isol snapshot isolation. It just means that I see a snapshot of the database

that that was created by any trans transactions that committed before I started. >> Yes. The question is do all J systems have some version of OC? Now some some systems will do uh 2PL locking >> it's it's one or the other. Multi- versioning is going to be you can do multi- versioning uh with CNS class you can do it with two-phase locking or you can do it with OCC but the way you also do multi-verging is with time stamps but like the time stamps will just tell you in which what version when was a version

created doesn't tell you who's allowed to do what and when OCC or 2PL tell defines that pro that that ordering >> question which one's the most common 2PL >> yeah All right. So, right, we're jumping ahead. Okay. Sorry. So, step we'll cover next class. There's a few systems that that do serializable, right? In ingress was was what Stoneburgger built before. Postgress. Kro DB is a distributed system out of New York City. Serial or BTB is a system I helped build when I was in grad

school, right? By default, you get serializability. You can't run anything lower. Google Spanner and I guess DSQL also as well. Actually, I'm not sure about DC, but Google Spanner is one of the few systems that support strict serializability, also known as external consistency, meaning the order in which transactions are committed is the order in which they arrive in the system. So, they're getting timestamps of when they show up, and that's the order that's going to use to determine when they

commit. Then he's like, what is cursor stability? So, that's this other weird thing. Again, there's a whole bunch of different isolation levels beyond the four basic I told you. And you can sort of think of like the the sort of chart here at the bottom. You have read commit, read uncommitted. I think you there's even one below this but SQL doesn't support this and so now you have sort of two branches you have above recommitted you think of like what you're getting fewer anomalies cursor

stability is something that IBM DB2 does basically you hold a read lock uh a shared lock on the cursor that's reading the data and that guarantees that within like as I'm as the cursor is scanning the data I'm holding implicitly a lock on that range but then when I'm done scanning I give it back up. So as I'm reading as as I'm reading the table within my cursor, I'm guaranteed to see a consistent view. But then after that, if I read it again, uh I it won't be repeatable.

>> Yeah. There'll be no no inserts or deletes while I'm scanning. >> Yes. Only in the range. Yes. But then as soon as I'm done scanning, I the cursor gives it up again. And then search again is it's the the order in which they arrive. So I'm kind of I'm I'm going fast here. We'll do demos and look at this more in the next class. But the main take I want you to get is like most systems most data systems that are out there today, most workloads are not running with serializable isolation even

though I made a big deal about it. Right? So this is a survey we did a few years ago where we asked DBAs for their databases running production. What's the most common isolation level they're using? And you can see the most common one is recommitted because that's the default in in most systems, right? >> What's that? Is that a reasonable default? >> Is it a reasonable default? Nobody knows, right? Because it depends because again it the these these problems might occur. So like if 99.99%

of the time you know there's no issue but then there's one time maybe you read something you shouldn't have read, how would you know, right? or like you you know you sometimes you see weird things that like you know anytime you maybe refresh a website and you don't see counters look correctly that's eventual consistency issues not this but like for other things like you wouldn't know all right I'm blazing on all this so I apologize going fast but the the main takeway from all this is

that there's basically two categories of protocols pessimistic like two-based locking and optimistic using time stamp warning that we talked about today right there's no one protocol better than another and then next class when we talk about multi- versioning it's actually being a combination of all these techniques put put together and we're going to now instead of maintaining a private workspace we're going to have the the new versions of change or the the objects that we're modifying they're

going to show up in the global database and we're use these timestamps to figure out what we're allowed to read or not read. Okay, hit it flips acrobats over [music] [music] the fortune. [music] Get the fortune [ __ ] maintain flow with the grain. Get the fortune [music] [ __ ] maintain flow with the gra.

