[music] [music] I'm still associ. [music] [music] Thank you for coming. You were here early. Nobody was here. I think yeah, we got here early. The other class before us wasn't here, so we didn't think there was class. Uh, but you still set up your DJ equipment. It shows you dedication to the craft. I appreciate that. All right, guys. A lot to cover. Um, unfortunately, the we would have the speaker from Yellow Brick today. Uh, that got has to get rescheduled to do a scheduling issue. Um, so today is just just me. No,

uh, no outside speaker. It's fine because there's a lot we want to cover for multiverging because it's a super cool topic and you're going to see this everywhere. All right, so again for you guys in class, project 3 is going to be due this this Monday coming or sorry, this Sunday coming up. The special office hours will be this Saturday at 3:00 in Gates. Homework 5 is going to be due again was extended for another week. That'll be on the 23rd. And then project four went out earlier this week and

that'll be due on Sunday, December 7th. And then we'll announce the recitation probably schedule that for next week obviously before Thanksgiving. So we try to do that next week. Um uh and then again you you want to finish project three make sure you pass all the tests and then do the merge of the latest version of the code from the public repo and you can get started on project four. So any questions about project three? >> Yes. loop or block. >> The question is should the nest loop

join be a a naive nestloop join or a block nest loop join? What do you want to do? >> Yes. >> Yeah, you can do that. Yes, it's up to you to decide. Yes. >> Yes. Other questions. [snorts] All right. So last class we were talking about OC and again there was the OCC there's the optimistic contriical protocol category uh and we were contrasting that with the pessim protocols like in two-phase locking and optimistic you assume that there's not going to be conflicts so you let

transactions do whatever they want and then only when they go to commit then you see you check to see whether that whether they would have violated any of the serizable monitoring, right? And in the case of the protocol we looked at OC, we talked about how when transactions make changes to the database, they don't apply them to the shared global database that every other transaction can read from. They're instead make a copy of the tool they want to modify, put it in their own private workspace, do whatever

manipulation they want on it. Uh, and then when they go to commit, if they're allowed to commit, they pass the validation phase. Uh, in the right phase, we then push that into the global shared database. So we're basically going to see the same thing today in multi- versioning, but instead of putting things in a private workspace, we're going to put things in the global database. But we're still have this idea that like transactions will work on versions of the data that in theory

could be uh invisible or not not not visible to to other transactions that are running at the same time. Again, we'll see that in a second. And then we spend time at the end talking about how to handle the fan read problem. Okay, this is additional anomaly that occurs when you have uh reason rights on ranges of data where tupils may be becoming uh maybe appearing or disappearing uh within the same transaction because some other transaction uh made those changes and we said how this this is a problem

this could occur in case of OCC and TBS locking because you can't acquire locks you can't check for things they don't exist the first time you run so we showed how to use a bunch of different mechanisms to overcome this. Uh, index locks is probably the most common one. Uh, but there's other variations. Locking the whole table prevents all these problems. That's but that that's obviously a uh a blunt based approach to solving it. So today now we're going to talk about

multiverse concurren. The confusing name is going to be it's not going to be even though it says has has concurrent coal in the name it's not going to be a a locking or time stamp ordering protocol in the same way we saw in the last two lectures rather you're still going to do 2PL you're still going to do OC you're still going to do whatever particle you you want to want but now there's going to be the additional concept of versioning in our database system that's going to open up some uh some new

opportunities to get some better parallelism than we would if we're just having everything in single version. So all the work you've done in in bus hub so far in the class that's a single version database system. Project 4 will be see we'll see how to make it multi-versioned. All right. So the idea with multi- versioning is that the database system is now going to maintain multiple physical versions of logical tupils that exist in uh in the database. So a logical tool would be like something

that you can identify based on the primary key, right? A logical concept that within your application, but then underneath the covers, we're going to create multiple versions of that logical tupil as transactions go ahead and modify them. So we're never going to do updates. We're never going to overwrite the any any tupil, right? Any sort of physical version exists as we did in two case locking or as we did in OC. Instead, we're always going to create new new physical versions. So now when transactions go to read

data, they're going to go check to see whether the the they're going to go find for for any logical object or logical tupa they're trying to find. They're going to check the version information, the version metadata we're going to store in every single object to determine which physical version is visible to them. And at any given time, there should be only one physical version that a transaction can see. So now we're now since we're not going to overwrite any existing uh tupils or

any any object in our database that means that over time as we update the you know as we update records we're creating a bunch of physical [snorts] versions at some point those physical versions are not going to be viewable anymore by by any active transaction and therefore we need to go through and run a garbage collection mechanism or protocol to go clean up these physical versions and reclaim the space and make things go faster. Right. [snorts] So we'll see this later on, but like one of the things you can

do if you don't want to do garbage collection, you get this thing called time travel queries. And that basically means it allows you to sort of to say write queries like select star from table fu at timestamp xyz. And assuming you have all the history of all the previous versions you've created, if your data system supports multi- versioning, then you can go back in time and say, you know, run on the state of the database as it existed at at the time stamp that you want. Right? By default, right, I run a select query,

I always get the latest version, right? But if I want, sometimes you want to go back in time and try to find previous versions. This mostly shows up in financial systems like if you're going to get audited, you want to be able to say here's the state of the database at this time when I made this trade, right? And the time travel queries give you that. The question is, is that commercial system to do this? Yes. And they'll they'll pay extra for it. Post had this originally in the 1980s, right?

>> The question the question is why did they kill it? Well, because in 1990s they realized, oh, we don't really need time travel queries for what we want to do. And the database is just getting bigger and bigger and bigger and running out of space. We need a way to clean it up. Then they added the vacuum or the garbage collector in like I think like SQL server like how do you say this? It's more than just saying I'm not going to do I'm not going to do garbage collection but it's basically end of the

day that's what it is like I'm just just don't run the garbage collector collection and then I need to have ability in my query and say select star from table food at this time stamp but like that's basically it and then SQL server charge you you know an extra $100,000 for that feature >> for not running the garbage collector yes right you also got to pay for the storage space extra you know extra storage space you're storing right um [snorts] all right so there's going to be two

important uh properties properties we're now going to have in multi- version incurren control that we didn't necessarily have certainly not with 2PO and some of these we get with OCC but not others. So the first is that writers are not going to block the readers. So readers can always read whatever version that's going to be visible to them even if another transaction is is creating a new physical version of that logical record they're reading the the and the reader transaction or either reading

query can go read a previous version. And likewise, when a transaction reads uh an object, that's not going to interfere with any writing transaction trying to update it. Right? Again, going back to distinct 2PL in that pessimistic protocol, in order for me to read an object, I got to get a shared lock on it. And in order for me to write an object, I got to get an exclusive lock on it. And those locks are not compatible. So if a reader got a shared lock on on an object, the writer can't

get the exclusive lock. Likewise, if if I had exclusive lock, nobody else can get the reader lock. We're not going to have that problem in in uh sort of vanilla uh multi version control. The >> question is how how do interaction interaction with indexes work? Well, give me like and the lecture. Yes, it makes it harder. Absolutely. So, NBCC is an old idea goes back to 1978. But what what is considered the first description of it wasn't necessarily in databases. It was more like an OS or file system paper. uh

there's a PhD dissertation in 1978 at MIT. Uh but in the early 1980s it was when the data people realized oh this is actually useful for what we want to do in our database system for transactions. Um and the what is considered the first two implementations of MCC is an early relational data system called RDB VMS. Uh this is this is written by at Deck. Um you probably never heard of Deck. Deck was like the Google of the 80s. It was the hot technology company. They if you've ever heard of vax that came from

deck so they they were they were building database system for the vax machines. uh they got deck got acquired by compact and then compact got acquired by HP and you know that it's pretty much been gutted at this point but then there's another system called interbase and that was more lightweight than RDB uh but I and I think that also ran on Vax as well and there both were written by this one guy Jim Starky who was a co-founder of newb and did a bunch of other stuff uh and did this for several

years right so interbase and RDB are VMS are still around so interbase has been uh forked off the commercial code. You still can get the commercial version of Interbase, but there's a open source version called Firebird uh that that is available now. And there's I think there's a fork of Firebird out of Russia called Red Database or Red DB, something like that. Um if everyone know why Firefox is called Firefox, it's because when it was originally Netscape and then Netscape, the company went under and

then they they wanted to turn the the source code over to make it an open source browser. They wanted to call it phoenix first because this be like a you know the phoenix of the netcape rising out of the ashes but there was other piece of software called that so they couldn't call it that then they were going to call it firebird and then because this database system exists they couldn't call it that so then they became became firefox rdbms uh even though deck got bought by compact compact by HP Oracle bought it

Oracle buys a lot of databases all right and so it still exists today you wouldn't you know this is basically maintenance mode you wouldn't build wouldn't build a new startup based based on it. But they have a product called Oracle RDB. And it's confusing because there's Oracle the company and there's Oracle the database which is a relational database and then there's also now Oracle RDB which is a relational database but it came from deck. But when people say Oracle they

don't mean this one they they mean the the big behemoth one that he makes a lot of money on. [snorts] All right. So let's look at an example of MVCC in action. So first thing I want to point out is now all my diagrams are going to have this these columns here that are going to show the the version ids. In actuality you don't store explicitly like I'm version one version two like in this way. I'm just doing this for illustrated purposes in power. So I'm going to be a z b b b b b b b b b

b b b b b b b b b b b z like have subscripts for the versions but we're not actually storing that. What we're instead going to store are timestamps. So we saw this in OC. We had this right time stamp for every single object or every single tube in the database. Anytime you updated something, you updated this right time stamp. Now, we're going to include a begin and an end time stamp. And this is going to represent the range of in in our transactional time time domain of when this object is considered visible.

And now the logic is going to be when transaction is run, they're going to be assigned timestamps when they start like at at begin. And then they're going to use that time stamp to determine whether the object that they're looking at is visible to them based on these begin and end time stamps. So in my example here, I only have one tuple. It's a, right? And so I have a begin time stamp of zero because there was some transaction that that modified this and they had time stamp zero. And then for the end time

stamp, it's going to be null or infinity. And this just means that this is the latest version, the newest version, newest committed version of this transaction at this actually I don't want to say committed. It's the It's the newest version of this transaction or sorry, newest version of this record in my database right now because there's no end time stamp. All right. So, we're transactions T1 starts. It's going to get time stamp one, right? And the first thing it wants

to do is a read on A. So, now we're going to go look in our database ignoring how we got to A. Usually an index, but we'll cover that in a second. So, now I say, all right, my time stamp is one. I'm looking for object the latest version of object A. In this case here, the begin time stamp is zero. The end time stamp is infinity. Time stamp one follows in that range and therefore uh this transaction will will read object A. So version A Z. Now we have a context switch. T2 starts get T2 gets

time stamp 2. It's now going to do a write on A. in this case here because now we're not taking locks in the same way we did with 2PL. Even though uh transaction one read A and another 2 TPL if there's a single version you get a shared lock and and then you wouldn't be able to write it. T1 sorry T2 is allowed to create a new version A and it's going to go install that. It's not going to modify the A Z. It's going to create a new one A1. It's going to set its begin timestamp to what

its time stamp is two. But then it's also going to go back now to a Z0 and it'll update its end time stamp to now be two. Right? Because this is saying that the A Z is only visible from zero inclusive to two exclusive. >> Why do you need the end time stamp? >> The question is why do we need the end time stamp? You just look at the what? Sorry. >> The question is why do I need the end time stamp, right? >> Right. Because he's saying because now I had to install the update in A1, right?

And then I have to also go update A Z, right? So now if I if I have another test shows up now they're T3. What version should they see? >> You said A1. All right. So what about sorry what if instead of T2 if this it gets time stamp three and now I have another T2. So T3 installs A1 and sets the begin time stamp three. What time stamp should should I be seeing now right for for my other transaction shows up. I need to know what the boundary is for certain things. I'm also going to use this to determine

that this is how I'm al going to determine that these tuples are no longer visible in any transaction and therefore I want to go clean them up. But he brings up another point and that is all right well if I'm destroying begin end time stamp at this point in time t1 and t2 are active so if I show up what version should I see there's not enough information just begin end time stamp to give me that information to tell me whether the transaction that made this change actually committed or not it just tells

me when the the version was visible so the other thing I'm going to add now is a is a separate transaction status table. It's a thing a global data structure like a hash table that's going to keep track of here's all the transactions that are running my system at this given time. So now in in in there I have T1 they're considered active and I take T2 when considered active and now I also know their time stamps. So then now when T context switch back to T1 T1's going to read A and at this point again it's

going to be able to go back and read the same version that it saw before. So it guarantees that it has a repeatable read here, right? And then now when uh when the transaction uh commits at some later point uh for T1 and T2, I know that there's never going to be another transaction that comes along that's going to be uh that can see version a z. So I want to go ahead and clean that up. So the beginning end time stamp give me give me that bound to say and I can look now in this transaction transaction

status table and say well I have a transaction that is time stamp three can never see a z because three is greater than two so it's safe for me to go ahead and clean up uh a z. All right let's look at another table. Same thing. So now T1's going to do a read on A, write on A, read on A. And now T2 is going to do a read on A and write on A. So again, we start like before. We read A, we read version A Z. That's fine. Then we do a write on A. We create a new version A1. That's fine,

right? Go update the the end time stamp for A Z to be our transaction time stamp T1. Now we contact switch over here. T2 can read A. That's fine. Uh, it's not going to be the newer version. And then now it's going to write on a here. And so in a sort of naive scheme like this, but I'm not taking locks, right? The T2 could detect that if I go try to write now a new version like an A2, I would see that there's an A1 there that has no end timestamp. Therefore, it's this is the latest version. So then now

I can consult the transaction table and say for the for the transaction that created version A1 I know what it is because begin time stamp tells me that. So I'll go find the transaction T1 that has time stamp one. This transaction is still active. This transaction is not committed yet. So therefore I can't write a new version because then that would be a write conflict and I have to go ahead and and abort T2. So now in my transaction table I would say it's and now status is aborted and

at some later point this will get cleaned up when we know we don't care about T2 anymore. >> Yes. >> The question is how does T2 need to know that it needs to read A Z not A1. So again knowing how I got to these versions right assume I just read all of them but in actuality it'll be a link list but we'll get there in a second. So I scan through and I see all right here's all the versions of A that I could possibly read. is a Z to A1. A Z is is is uh is the oldest older version that

should not be visible to me because my time stamp is two. The end time stamp of A Z is one. Therefore, I need I can't read that. It's not visible to me. But then now I I should be able to go now see A1. But A1 was modified by is a new version created by a transaction that has not committed yet. Therefore, I can't create a new version after that. >> Okay. So it doesn't get >> it physically would read it. Logically it does not. Physically it has to see it. Oh like >> yes

>> assuming we're just scanning through everything. There's other ways to get around that. Logically should only see A1 and know that okay I want to create a new version A2. But because the transaction that made Aid has not committed yet I can't do over can't overwrite it. >> That would it would be a right conflict. It would be a lost update in this example here. I mean yeah but what if you don't write to that you end up >> uh yeah so the point is yes you would

end up reading something that would not you would not that has not committed yet in this case here like we're jumping ahead but in this case here you would say I if I'm having consistent snapshot on snapshot isolation then I would actually see a zero not a1 because a1 is not committed yet. So I would see a z but then if I try to write to a a make a2 then I have a problem. But you're you're getting you're getting to the you're getting to the problem. Yes. >> Yeah. Next slide. Yes.

>> Yes. >> Yeah. So, so back here when it when it reads A, it would it reads A Z because the transaction that modified and made the latest version A1, which is T1, has not committed yet. So, it would not see that. But then when it tries to install and create a new version, it's not allowed to do that. >> So, maybe maybe misspoke. It it does it reads reads a Z here, but it when it's when it's when it's trying to figure out what to then write to, it has to keep going to A1. Assuming we're we have to

create a new version after that. >> The question is why why is it allowed to read a Z? >> Next slide. Hold up. All right. So the the behavior we're seeing here is what is called snaps to isolation. And there's another isolation level consider similar to like serializable read committed repeat read things we talked last class. And so the guarantee on a snapshot isolation is that it will see a consistent snapshot of the database that existed when the transaction started. And a consistent means that it only

contains updates from transactions that have committed that committed before the transaction started. And so that means you're not gonna see any torn rights from actual transactions. You won't see like if if T1 updated A and updated B transaction T2 can't see the see the update on A and not see the update on B. It has to see the state of the database as existed from only committed transactions. So in that case it is like repeatable reads or sorry read committed but it has this additional uh additional anomaly we'll

talk about next that that we have to handle. And in the simplest case, you basically if you have two transactions um try to update the same object that be first writer then the first writer wins not the last. Sorry, let me just fix that now immediately. That's important. Okay. Yes, first writer wins. And then we saw that in my example there, right? The transaction T2 would try to to over create a new version on A, but because T1 wrote a new version A, T1's the first writer. A is going to win and T2 has to abort.

That's the basic version of of give you that. But it is susceptible to a different phenomena, a different anomaly that two-phase locking and OCC is not going to hit. And that's the thing called the right skew. And the the basic idea of the right skew is that you're allowed to read things uh as a consistent snapshot and you may make decisions about that consistent snapshot view. You saw where you end up writing things uh in a certain way and the right behavior could not occur in that manner if you're actually truly

running in serial order. So me standing here and saying words and being headway doesn't make any sense. Let's look at a sort of a a simplified example. So this comes from Jim Gray. Again, he won the touring award in databases in the in the the 1990s. Um he invented two ways locking and a bunch of other stuff at SMR. So this is sort of like a a metaphor he likes to use to explain this. So say I have a database containing marbles and I have four marble marbles and they're two colors. They're either black or white. And so

I'm going to have one transaction come along and change all the white marbles to black. And then another transactions going to come along and they change all the black marbles to white. So same these two transactions are going to run at exactly the same time right in in separate workers. So when they start they're again under snapshot isolation they have a consistent view uh consistent snapshot of the database right they see two black marbles and two white marbles for both of them. So then

now they're then going to say all right my job is to flip all the black marbles to white and the bottom the top one to flip all the white marbles to black. So they go ahead and do that right. So what I have in the red box is that's the right set of those transactions. That's the new version that they're going to create. So then now when I stall in the database, I end up like this, right? Two white marbles, two black marbles. So that that issue right there is the right skew where you're allowed to

you're updating things in a certain way that if you're running a serial order could not happen, right? Because I have two whites, two whites, and two blacks. And if I was running true serial order then I would say I run transaction one T1 first changes all the white marbles to black then I run transaction T2 first and I change all the black marbles the white. So under a true ser ordering they the be all one color but under snapsa isolation that schedule I show before is allowed to happen and you end up with uh

you know two two sets of color two colors. So two-phase locking wouldn't have wouldn't have this problem, right? Going back here, because when I do the read at this first step, I would take share locks on everything that I want to read and the other transaction wouldn't be able to take an exclusive lock and write it. But snap to isolation because I'm I'm creating these new versions uh and my readers don't end up blocking the writers that you know this anomaly can happen.

So the original specification of two-based locking or sorry of of the the the the SQL standard isolation levels that came out in like 1992 didn't account for this problem and they only considered isolation levels in the context of of two-phase locking systems and then this was done uh a lot of people working this were at Microsoft at the time in the early 90s and then they realized that they made a mistake and forgot this this particular issue and then there's a subsequent paper that came after the the standard came out and

said, "Oh, yeah, by the way, here's this other phenomenon that can occur if you're doing if you have subset isolation under multi version control." And one of the guys that wrote the paper sent me an email once saying, uh, the mistake was because the other person that was supposed to check his his the spec was like not paying attention, was writing code at the time. He's like, "Yeah, whatever. That seems okay." And only after the fact they realized uh this was a mistake and then they had to

follow up on it. Again, Jim Gray is very famous again for winning the Turner Award, but he like he he was very good at simplifying really complex database concepts into easy things to understand. So, if you ever heard of things like the five-minute rule, like how long should you keep data in memory before evicting it to your cache? That comes from Jim Gray. If you ever heard of like 59s or 69's latency, that's from Jim Gray as well, right? So, he, you know, very famous and very prolific in databases.

>> What's that? weaker. >> It's the question is is it weaker than read committed? No. So remember last class I sort of showed sort of parallel tracks. There was like one side was going uh read committed repeatable read up to serializability. Another one is like snap isolation. So they're like orthogonal. Yeah. All right. So multi version control is more than just again that I'm creating multiple versions. If you're going to build a database system as you know that

you know like we do in this class we care about then choosing to do multi version control is going to have a bunch of other design decisions you have to make how to support multi- versioning that's going to affect the the entire system for pretty much every all the lectures we talked about so far if you now do multi-verging you have to consider that in in all of that and again pretty much every modern data system that's around today is doing some variation of multi versioning >> the question is what's that for that's a

special project we'll call that All right. All right. So what are these design decisions? So the first is like what is the current protocol we're going to use? Because as I said it's called multi version control and I showed sort of a naive implementation of it where you you have that you know two guys try to write and and you prevent that. But you can still do two-phase locking or OC on top of multi-verion control having a multi- versioning system. So we'll discuss what that looks like. Uh then we'll talk

about how how we're going to store these different versions, how we're going to do garbage collection, how to handle indexes, and then how to handle deletes. Okay. All right. So the first one is C program. As I said, there's a bunch of different you you take all the the the protocols we talked last two classes uh and you can apply that to uh you apply that into a multi-verion environment. Um so the the one I showed before is the beginning was basic version of time stamp ordering. uh you're just assigning

time steps and using that to determine the serial ordering, but you still can do OCC and you still can do two-phase locking in the context of multi- versioning. So let's look see what this looked like with 2PL and then we'll open up Postgress and see what they do. Right? Again, so this is the same setup I had before. I'm going to do begin uh for T1 do a read on a write on a and read on A. And then T2 is going to do read on A and write on A. So we start off I can read sorry T1 can read a zero. That's fine.

T1's going to write A to A. Creates a new version A1. Goes back and updates the end time stamp for uh A Z. That's fine. Now I context switch over here. And now I'm going to get a try to read a A. In this case here, I can read A Z uh because T1 is not committed yet. But then now when I go to try to write a under the scheme I showed before, basic timestamp ordering, this right is going to be denied and the transaction has to abort. But if I'm doing two-phase locking, then it's going to try to get

the the exclusive lock on A, the logical A, not not the physical version. It's always the logical version. I'm get the try to get the exclusive lock on A, but that's going to get stalled by the lock manager because T1 already has the exclusive lock on A. So, it has to wait. Then T1 can do the read on A, sees the same version that had before. That's fine. Then now t uh the lock gets released for uh after we commit because we update it's now committed. Then the lock gets released over here and t2 can then now

create the new version and it updates the the end time stamp just like it did before. Why? Because because when t1 committed t2 that releases the exclusive lock t2 can then acquire the exclusive lock and do the right The question is why is this useful? Because I T2 was able to read A without even though T1 had exclusive lock on it. You can't do that on a GPL. >> No, because I'm reading the older version of it. Well, you can only allow one writer anyway. Like only one transaction can

install a new new version. So the exclusive lock is like preventing any other transactions from doing from doing that. >> Okay. >> The there is no there are no share locks. >> Yes. All right. So let's talk Postgress and hopefully uh this will more clear. Okay. So we all say that. All right. Um, so I have a simple table in Postgress that has two tupils, right? Has an ID and and a value. Okay. And now you see I have um I have two terminals at the same time. So I can do the same thing. Select star from

transaction demo, right? Because I'm gonna I want to run two transactions at the same time and see what happens. All right. So we're going to run this now in the default isolation which I so maybe I got to come back and quit out and come back make sure I get the default. Okay. So we're going to run in Postgress and I'm going to set the the deadlock timeout for Postgress to be 30 seconds, right? Because otherwise I think the default is maybe a minute or something like that. So I'm going to

start a transaction up here. start a transaction down below, right? And then now I'm gonna go read a single tuple. So select star from transaction demo. Actually, let me just do it this way. Um, yeah. So I can go read that single tuple there. That's fine. Now I go down below and I can go read the same tupil, right? That's fine. But now the top guy is going to then update it. Right, we're just incrementing the counter increment by one. So now if I go read it, right now I see the value is 101. It was

100. So I added one to it. We're good there. Now down below, if I read it, what should I see? 100. Correct? Because the one up above has not committed yet. But now what's going to happen if I try to also update the object uh that same record down below in transaction T1? What should happen? stalls, right? Because the transaction at the top has the exclusive lock on on the on the the logical object where id equals one logical tupil. Therefore, it has to wait and then now if I go up here now I

commit what's going to happen lock gets released the by the top transaction the the bottom transaction then can then acquire it. Now here's the question. So it was started off 100 the transaction at the top made at 101. What what is the what is the what is the what is going to be the value down below now? He they say 101. Wait a second. Say again raise your hand if you saying 100. Nobody. Good. Raise your hand if you say 101 and a half. Raise your hand say 102. 102. Right? Because we're still in the

transaction down below. This is still an active transaction. The one at the top is committed. The one one down below is still active. So it it was then now when it when it does the right, it then gets the latest version and then can actually update it because the default in Postgress is read committed not repeatable read. So when I do my update, what do you have? How do you do an update? You got to go update it first or so you got to go read it, find the thing you want to update, then update it. So it's in this case here because

the transaction at the top committed under recommitted the bottom transaction is allowed to now read that version and then go updated and incre increment the counter. So we we can prove that again. So watch. So I'll start a transaction at the top. And we see now it's it's 101. Start a transaction at the bottom. Read it. Now it's 101 as expected. Now I do my update up here down below. I can't see it because the transaction at the bottom has not sorry the transaction at the top

has not committed yet. But now when I go to commit, right, I can see the change, right? All right, let's try my SQL. Same thing. I have a simple table with two two records. So, um, make sure I'm not serializable. All right. So, I'll start. that I'll start a transaction at the top. Start a transaction at the bottom. Do the same thing. I'm going to read that one record. [snorts] Where am I? Let's copy and paste. Sorry. surprised it let me be in a in a transaction for that. Okay,

actually my SQL I think let you do transactions across databases. Postgress does not. Um okay, let's try this again. So now I'll start a transaction. I see 100. Start a transaction. I see 100. And then now I'm going to do that same update for one. What should I see at the bottom? >> 100. Correct. Yes. Right. Under snaps isolation or under with multi versioning, you're not going to see the changes for uncommitted transaction. But then now if I commit this transaction at the top and of course if I go read it

from the top I see 101 for for ID equals 1. Now at the bottom still in this transaction if I run this query what will I see 100 or 101? 100 because by default my SQL runs with uh repeatable reads. So even though the transaction at the top has committed, the the one at the bottom wants to see what it saw before. So it's not going to see that. But then let's try this now. Let's try new transaction at the top. Let me kill this one at the bottom. Start new transaction here. Right. We see 10 101 200. Now I'm going to update

it. I haven't read it at the bottom yet. What should I see? 102 or 101? 101. Right? In this case here, even though is repeatable read because with multi versioning it hasn't the the top transaction has not committed yet it can't see it. So if I now commit should be just like before, right? Okay, I don't I don't see it. So, how can we how can we see what's actually going on? So, in Postgress, we didn't do this before. Um, we I don't think I gave a demo of the how it's

actually storing um am I might be in a transaction that's why. Yep, there it was. Okay. Um, so now all right. So I I haven't talked this before in Postgress but of how it's actually storing records and what it's actually storing in the metadata. But in Postgress it's going to store the the time stamps physically in the in the tupil with a xmin and xmaxx. So now for my table here you see that now I have Xmin there's some time stamp 1396 it's going to respond to whatever

transaction that created it and then the Xmax zero just means it's it's the latest version and then that CT ID thing that one I don't think I talked about but that's basically the record ID that's the page number and the slot number for for any any tupil. So every that's not actually physically stored the same way the time stamps are. It's it is a it's derived from the from the the from just as it's scanning the data I know I'm reading this page and this offset number and in case of Postgress

you can actually um do lookups like this you can physically address it like transaction or transaction demo where CT ID equals and then you can pass in this right and you can actually read tuples that way you don't want to do that way because again if when I create new versions it's going to it's going to get moved now but let me now do this with serializable isolation I don't think I'm going to transaction let me see yeah okay so in Postgress you when you call begin you can set what isolation

level you want so now I'm going to I'm going say I want to be serializable [clears throat] so now I'm going to read the in the top transaction I'm going to read the the data and again now I see the CT ID And I see the the the minmax timestamps for this transaction. So now on the bottom transaction, I'm going to update it. And so now what I'm doing here, I'm adding this returning clause here. This is this is saying run this update query and and return back something for me. In this

case here, I like think of like the projection output of a select statement. This I wanted to call this function transaction ID current. And this gives you in postgress what's the ID of my transaction. So now it calls my update. And now I see I get transaction ID 1397. So now if I go back to the top terminal and I run this query, what should I see? Still see the the previous version. I saw before but now you can see where before the the Xmaxx was zero or null now it's 1397 which is the transaction

ID of my transaction at the bottom. So this is like proving that like this is actually updating things in the way that that we discussed like Postgress is like a textbook definition of of a of a datab. But you also see now too if I run this query, the same query down here, right? The the one at the top sees the the latest version. And if you look at the let me bring it down a little bit. Sorry. Right. So the the one at the top when I run select starve on the table, you see that look at the CT ID. I'm seeing the

the the the tupil at page zero offset slot one and page zero off slot two down below since this is the transaction that modified the table I'm seeing the first version of the second tupil at 02 but I'm also now seeing my new version 03 so postgress is actually storing the new version in another slot inside the page which is a terrible way to do it but we'll cover that in a second all right let me roll these And we can prove that Postgress is doing um is doing deadlock detection because if I

run transactions and have a deadlock, it'll kill it. So what I'm going to do now is tell Postgress if check for a deadlock in in 10 seconds to kill something. So I'll have my transaction at the top starts transaction at the bottom starts. We're good there. The transaction at the top is going to modify uh where ID equals 1, right? I'm allowed to do that. I get the exclusive lock one. Transaction at the bottom is going to update ID equals 2. That's allowed to happen. That's fine.

But now the one at the top is now going to try to update uh ID equals 2. It has to stall because it can't get the exclusive lock on that. The one at the bottom is going to try to update one. It's going to stall too because the top guy has exclusive lock on that. And then within 10 seconds, the deadlock detector is going to run and it's gonna kill one of them. And there you see it is the one at the top got killed. See deadlock report, right? Kill the one at the top. And then my my one

at the bottom. As soon as the the one at the top got killed, the bottom one was allowed to run immediately because the lock gets released. All right, one more thing. So that was that was with serializability or serializable isolation level. Let's now run this at a lower isolation level. Let's do read uncommitted. Right? Both transactions are running with that isolation level. And now again I can I can run my query at the bottom the top I see the two versions I expect to see. I see the one at the bottom as well. Uh

I point out the Xmaxx the the max time stamp the end time stamp got updated with 1399. This is where I'm not showing this. There's a transaction table that's going to tell you whether the the transaction that last modified this whether this actually has committed or not. In this case here 1399 did not commit. It's something I rolled back. So when they go read a version, they would say, "I know this one has a X-Maxx, but it's in the range of I'm going down to the C, but

this is actually the latest version. There isn't anything else after that I want to look at." But that's that's a minor detail. All right. So now we're going to have the one at the top. They're going to update update the record, right? Just, you know, add a new value return my my transaction ID is is 1400. Now, at the bottom, if I run this query, what should I see? Should I see the the version at the that the top created, or should I see whatever the latest version that I saw

when I ran it the first time? And again, I'm running on a read uncommitted. The top transaction is uncommitted. Should the bottom transaction see the top transactions change? Yes. What's that? >> Could Right. does not. So Postgress is lying to you but in a good way. So you tell Postgress I want to run read uncommitted. It doesn't actually give you that. It'll still give you recommitted because it's more work and more engineering to go add support for read uncommitted to make you go let you go

read things that haven't committed yet. So they didn't just they didn't implement it. So by default it's just recommitted even even if you ask for something lower. Oracle is the opposite. Oracle says you say I want something higher they'll lie to you and say yeah you got it but it's actually something lower right so it's better to lie I guess better to overperform uh rather than underperform when people ask for certain things but it's debatable whether how much read uncommitted would

you know could actually help performance in this case here since I can always read a consistent snapshot that's probably okay Their statement is under NBCC is read uncommitted not going to give you anything meaningful. No, I'm saying the post implementation of NBC is not going to do that for you. running. SCire not >> the question is uh in my examples I was I was reading the table when I was getting the shared lock or what what you saying >> and the child will be >> uh

For this for this one it would be ID was the primary key. So >> okay >> sure okay >> it exe >> would it execute the read? >> Yeah like the sequences can block at the update or block at the lowest level as well. >> Ah okay. So like again the locks are the locks are on like on on logical objects. So I can physically read all the versions. So if I had to screen scan everything, I'm going to physically read all the version. I'm allowed to do that because I have to go check to see whether time

stamps are actually uh visible to me. Uh and I know that because I'm not overwriting anything, it's not like something's gonna get swapped out when I'm trying to read stuff. Um so then it's only when I go then try to say I want to update stuff then I go try like the then I would acquire the lock on the the logical object I want to modify. >> So we acquired the sh we acquired the right upgrade to write a step doing update and the update exeutor. Yes, whether or not it happens on the

update executor or not beforehand, I it depends on implementation, but you would know again depends on how your lock manager how you're organizing the keeping track of locks. Do I keep track of them at on the record ID level? No, because those record IDs could get moved around. Uh so you maybe you typically do it on like the primary key level. So in that case I don't if I have the primary key I can lock it before I get to the update exeutor because I know what it is. Yes. >> Question is do I do I do I need a multi

version indexes? Yes. Let's keep going. We'll get to that. We only have 30 minutes left. There's still a lot to cover. Okay. Um all right. So version storage. This is the most important thing is like how we're actually going to be storing these different versions. Uh, and the idea is that we're not going to have these all the the tupils just randomly in in our in our in our table. Uh, oh, they could be still random, but like I don't have to scan and try to find what versions

are visible visible me every time you run. Instead, we're going to maintain basically a link list using the header of every every tupil to keep track of what's the next version in the version chain for a logical tupil. What's the next physical version I should be looking at, right? So indexes are always going to point to the head of the chain. Uh and then the the different storage schemes we'll talk about will will vary in whether it's going to be what is at the head of the version chain and what is inside the

actual version chain itself. So the three approaches are to do appendon, time travel and delta storage. Append only is the basic idea of what I've been showing so far where it's like anytime I want to update a tupil, I make a complete copy of that that that tupil and write my changes into that copy, right? And I'm just appending that into the same same storage space I would have for for my my all my tupils. Time travel storage is similar to append only but the instead of instead of making storing the different versions in

the same table space as your regular tupils I'm actually have sort of have a separate virtual table that's tied to the main table where I'm just going to put all my versions inside of that. So I still make a copy of the tupil but instead of making a new copy like in the same page where where the tupil originally was existing I'm going to put it into some other storage space. [snorts] The last approach, which is the the the best approach, is to do what's called delta storage, where I don't actually

make a complete copy of the tupil anytime I'm going to modify it. I only create a delta record, like a diff that keeps track of here's the ch here's the changes of the columns that were modified. And so you just you just copy what the old values are of the things that you modified, and you overwrite the the the main table tupil with the latest version. So delta storage is the most common one. This is what this how pretty much everyone built a modern multi-verging system today. The append only one is less common but

it's what Postgress does. So pretty much anybody that forks Postgress is going to be doing this. Yes. >> The question is for for uh for time travel storage. Am I storing the last version or all versions? all older versions. SAP HANA put the newest version for whatever reason in the in the time travel store then they flipped it. They got rid of that. But in general, yeah, you like I saw the main table. I'll go through examples. I before I overwrite the one in the main table, I make a copy of the old version,

put that in the time travel storage. It's at a high level, it's the same as the first approach. It's just because you're copying the entire table, but the the way you're storing it is separate and has some benefits. All right. So, the second one is is rare. Uh the first one, again, it's easy to do because you just can just make a copy of the tool and update things, but it's actually terrible. Uh and so my my takeaway for this, don't do this. Even though Postgress does this, don't do this.

Right? Postgress for for you know, as great as it is as a database system, this is actually the worst part of its implementation. It's got a terrible backend. Uh I've said this publicly. I have a blog article says the part of Postgress we hate the most. It's this. It's what I'm talking about right now. And they did it in the 80s, but nobody would do this now today, right? My SQL and Oracle do the last approach, the delta storage, and that's the right way to do it. Let's see why. All right. So,

append only storage again, it just means that anytime I'm going to modify a tupil, I uh append a new version uh of the of that of that tupil into my into my uh my regular table space. So, say I'm going to update object A. I'll first copy the the that the current version for all its values in my in some kind of memory buffer and then I'll install the change into the into the page with the latest version. But then now I got to go update the pointer in the in the tupil. I'm showing at the end for because it's

PowerPoint, but it's it's in the header of of of the tupil to now reflect that I have a new version here. And then I update things in my version chain. But in my example here, the way I'm ordering the versions is by oldest to newest. So the oldest version is a z. The indexes would point to a z. So now if I want to find the newest version, I got to scan along, look at the different versions, follow the pointer until I find the one that that that's visible to me based on the begin and end

timestamps. So the version chain ordering can go a bunch of different ways. So what I show for is the oldest and newest, right? The basic idea is that anytime I want to make a new version, right, I just append it to the end. But now of course now with most your transactions, most transactions want the the latest version. I don't care about the oldest version usually. So that means that when I want to find the latest version of this object A, I got to follow into the the head of the version chain through an

index or however I got there like with a record ID and then I scan along until I find the end or find the version that's actually visible to me. So if your version chain is really really long, then this is going to suck and be slow. But it does have some some other benefits we'll talk about in a second. The alternative is to do newest to oldest where this just says now the the version chain is ordered by so where the head is the newest version. So if I want to create now a a new version for this

object then I slide everybody over put something at the head of version chain and just update my pointer that way. But I also have to update now whatever the record ID is that corresponds to this logical tupil in an index or index is plural because now the head is not wherever A3 was. Head is wherever A4 is. Again, I'm creating a new new version. I'm appending that into my table space. So now I got to go update all of all those indexes to reflect this. Of course, now if my if my transactions

only need the latest version, then that's super easy to do because I just pop to the the head and I'm done. All right, time travel storage. Again, the idea is that instead of making a copy of a tupil and appending it to the regular table space, I'll first make a copy of it into the old version into this separate table space. It just looks like a regular table, just internally you treat it differently, right? And then I update my my version pointers to all to point all these things now.

And then I can overwrite now what the master version, the main version in the main table. And I just have to update the pointer to point to the the latest version of version chain. In this case here, we're going uh newest to oldest. Right? This is what SQL server does. SCP HANA was doing oldest and newest and then then they flipped and got rid of that. So this again this seems like a trivial thing. Why would I just store it in a separate table inside of the main table? But now because I know that this table

over here is going to contain only old versions, assuming I'm going newest to oldest, then when I want to start doing garbage collection, I can just look at the time travel table and not interfere with the main table. In the case of Postgress when the when when the vacuum runs the degar collector runs they got to touch the main table where all your other you know where all your other transactions are are executing and you potentially interfere with them. But as I said the best way to do this

the pre preferable way to do this is do delta storage. Again the idea is here is that anytime I'm going to update a record I first copy the the the the columns that going to get modified into this separate space over here are called the delta storage. uh I think Oracle and my SQL column roll back segments because basically this is where I'm going to store all my discs. So I'm going to put all the old versions of of the tupils for just the columns that I modified the attributes that I modified all that goes

over there. Once that now now installed then I can do my my I can overwrite whatever the latest version is in the main table and then now update the pointer to point to this this version. So then now again if I create a bunch more versions right I update this this record again I I just update the the pointer to the to the sort of the head of the the or the next the head of the of the the roll back segment for this version and I just update my pointers in my to keep maintain the version chain so

I can go back and find the oldest versions and again just like before when I do garbage collection which I talk about in a second this is trivial to do or not it's easier to do now because I can just in some cases if I if I keep track of the watermarks of what versions are visible to me and I know that some big chunk of my rollback segment or delta storage is not visible to me at all. I just blow it away and I don't have to do any any mucking around on the main table. So now if I want to go re find an older

version, it's just like like playing a diff or a patch. If I need to get version A2, then I would start by materializing in memory. Here's the here's my for my my buffer space for my transaction, my query. here's A3 and go apply now the changes in in this order and that puts me back to the version I had before. In my example here, I'm only showing, you know, tupless with one one one attribute. Um, and if you have a thousand attributes and you only update one of them, this is way more efficient.

All right, so how how are we actually do this garbage collection piece? So the idea is that we're going to use those timestamps, the beginning and end time stamps and the transaction status table to determine what transactions uh what what what versions cannot be seen by any actual transaction running right now. Right? And again remember snapsa isolation it says that transactions have a consistent view of the database. It means they can only see the uh versions that that that were committed before that transaction

started. So if I have a newer version of an object from a committed transaction, then any other previous version uh could could potentially be thrown away and deleted and removed because no other transaction be able to see it because only see that latest committed version. So now the challenge is going to be how do we find transactions? How do we find these expired versions? And then how do we decide when it's re safe to go ahead and reclaim them? I say also too, it's not just versions that were created by committed

transactions. If my transaction makes a bunch of changes and then the then it aborts, I I got to go ahead and clean those those versions up as well because I know definitely no no one could ever see them because the transaction didn't finish. So the basic idea we we do this in in the transaction status table, you keep track of like a a watermark, a threshold, and says here's the the global minimum transaction ID that could still see some versions of of of of tupils or objects. And once I know that

that thing is always moving forward in time, assuming I don't have transactions set around for days, then at some point I can say, all right, I know there's no no transactions active that could see this versions and I go ahead and remove them. So let's see how we want to go ahead and reclaim them. So the first is be tupal level garbage collection and this is where we just going to just scan the data and try to find versions that aren't visible to us and we go ahead and throw them away. And we can either do

this by separate dedicated workers running in the background uh or we can run this do this while transactions are actually running. If they encounter versions that are that aren't visible any transaction then they will actually go ahead and remove things. And the last one would be keep just keeping track of the rewrite set or sorry the right set of transactions while they run so that when they go ahead and commit we know which versions they've invalidated and we go ahead and remove them.

All right. So the first one is tuple level garbage collection. Again there's two approaches. There's vacuum vacuuming. There's dedicated workers and then there's cooperative uh vacuuming. So say I have two transactions that are actively running T1 T2. T1 has time stamp 12. T2 has time stamps 25. So now the this information what time stamps are still active will be sent to the vacuum. It's now just going to do a sequential scan on the table and look at the beginning end time stamps and

identify which versions are not visible by any active transaction. So in this case here I have A100 B 100. They have begin timestamps between one and nine. The smallest time stamp I have is 12. 12 can't view either of those versions. So I know it's safe for me to go ahead and remove them. >> What's that? Uh the question is 12 can read those version. Uh well assuming there's another a there's some there's another a somewhere. Yeah. And you would know that based on how

like you would know the system would know I'm doing oldest newest newest oldest. It would know something about what the pointer like am I at the am I in the middle or the end or whatever right? But I'm you correct yes that there should be another version a make this more clear. So sequential scanning sucks because just to do you know auto do this vacuuming because what if there's a bunch of pages that haven't been modified since the last time I run vacuuming I don't want to fetch them in

from disk bring them in memory pollute my buffer pool and evict maybe useful data right so the way postgress handles that is they maintain a bit map of what blocks or pages have been modified since the last time the the vacuum ran. So now it says when it runs, right, it just looks at this says scans all this and figures out here's all the the the page IDs that that have been modified since the last time I run and those are the only ones I need to bring in and go clean up. Doesn't know how they were modified.

Just knows that they they were modified in some way. And this reduces unnecessarily bring in pages that you don't need to clean. Cooperative cleaning is is is the basic idea is that when transactions run, they're responsible for cleaning things up of any older versions they find. So say T1 starts and does a lookup to get object A from and it follows the index and say the index here we're doing oldest and newest. So when it lands to the head of the version chain, it's the oldest version. And now it's going to

know from that the the the the global transaction status table what's the smallest time stamp of any actual transaction. And therefore as it scans along it may encounter versions that are not visible by any actual transaction. Therefore it's this transaction's responsibility to go ahead and clean them up as you scan scan along. >> Sorry that's why The state is this is why oldest and newest advantage in some cases. Yes, because I could if I'm doing this quer cleaning I can handle that. But of

course now this makes read queries and being doing writes because I'm I'm doing rights here. I have to update versions information right because now I got to go update the index to now point to the new head of the version chain. So what what was a select query should have been read only is now actually doing update. Now logically it's not updating the database. Physically it is but so so it's not taking lo not taking logical locks on a but it is taking physical latches on the data structure to update

things all right transaction level GC is the basic idea is that when transactions are updating records updating objects they just keep track of what things they've invalidated so I don't have to go hunt and peck and try to find where these older versions are now when my my back wants to I know exactly where they where they would be. Actually, going back here for for the cooperative cleaning, I just also mentioned too that like B 0 has maybe a bunch of old versions too that need to be cleaned up, but if nobody

ever reads them, then they never get reclaimed. So, Microsoft calls these dusty corners. So, you still actually need both if you want to do these because periodically, every so often, you're going to run the the back vacuum and clean up the things that nobody's ever read because eventually you want you want to clean up everything. All right. So track transaction level GC the idea is that as transactions make changes they keep track of the versions that they invalidate. So in this case here I I I create a new version of A

make A3 but I know therefore that I've invalidated A2 assuming my transaction is going to commit that that this thing should not be should be eventually be reclaimed once I know it's not visible. So then now uh if I update other things same thing B6 put that in my my version my full version set. So now when the transaction commits it's the the vacuum says okay these are the versions that have been modified. I know there's not you know the the end time stamp for these is going to be less

than 10. Uh so therefore any if there's any transactions that are still there are no transactions that could potentially view these view these versions I know go ahead I want to clean them up. Right. So again, instead of having a sort of decentralized approach to doing the vacuuming, this is like putting everything in a centralized data structure. All right. So now we get to the point that people keep asking about how do we actually manage indexes? So primary key indexes are going to be super easy or

easyish because it's always the primary key index is always going to be responsible for pointing to the head of the virgin chain. In the case of like index organized storage like my SQL the the tupil itself is going to be in the leaf pages but that you you still can consider that as the the logical head of the version chain and then they have the separate roll back segment where they restore all the previous versions right so then now the challenge is going to be how do we handle secondary indexes

uh in the case of primary key indexes too if you if you modify the attributes that is the primary key of of the tupil then you just treat that as a delete followed by an insert. You still have to handle the case where like someone deletes something the primary key and then you commit and then you need to now insert that primary key again. We'll see that in a second. You got to handle that. That that's a corner case. But in general, you just treat it as two distinct tuples. I delete it and

then I insert it if I update. It's the secondary indexes that are going to be problematic. And again, now you see why I was trying to say at the beginning like all the the ways we decide how we're going to store versions and and you know whether it's oldest to newest, newest to oldest, whether it's pend only or delta storage, that's going to affect all parts of our system because now we need to account for that in our secondary indexes. What are they actually going to be pointing to?

Because if I'm moving things around ahead of chain, uh I may have to go update that thing if I'm pointing to, you know, the newest version. The question is why I treat an update why why do I treat an update as a delete file insert >> uh rather >> they're proposing optimization where my primary key is ID I have ID equals 1 I then update the two board say ID equals 2 and what I'm saying is you first delete ID equals one from the index then you insert it. You're proposing that you insert it first to

see whether it would conflict. That's an optimization you could do. Yes, I suppose. But it's it's the same. [snorts] All right. So again to show you again why this why thinking about you know multi-verging throughout the entire system matters is because depending on your environment depending on your workload depending on your hardware these different design choices for how you're going to implement multiver can have pretty significant difference in performance and behaviors and so

there's a great blog article which is over 10 years old now from Uber um about their journey from going from from Postgress to my SQL the reason why they had to switch from Postgress to my SQL is because the the way postgress was doing multiverging in particular and how they handle secondary indexes was actually less efficient in Postgress than it was in my SQL. The real name of this blog article should be actually be why why Uber went from my SQL to Postgress back to my SQL because they started the MySQL they hired some guy

says let's go to Postgress and they switched they realized that was a mistake they had to go back to my SQL I'm sure they paid millions and millions of dollars to do this they could have paid us to tell them not to do it for less um but let's see what's going on all right so the challenge again with secondary indexes is that I got to point to something as my value portion of my index uh you know of my my my of my record. But if I'm starting to change what it means to be the head of the version

change based on the the ordering I'm doing, then I potentially have to go update all my uh my all my secondary indexes. So, one way to get around having to update everything is to use a logical pointer where it's like a proxy to represent a sort of sort of almost like a key that allows you to then find what the true head of the virgin chain is. what what is the true current record ID for this given tubor. The challenge though is going to be basically an additional indirection layer because when I do my

lookup my secondary index I now have this this logical pointer and I got to go figure out how to get get the physical pointer where the actual tupolis actually is. So I do look up on another index. The other approach to do update physical pointers like what is actually the true head of the version chain. Let's see a basic example. So this is um this is doing a pend only uh storage with newest to oldest. So not postgress is oldest to newest but newest to oldest. So if I do a look with the primary key right the

primary key is always going to have the record ID as the value and that's going to always be the head of the version chain. So that's fastish like I can always go exactly to where I want right and depending on whether my transaction needs the newest version or the oldest version I still have to maybe scan along the version chain but the index part is is straightforward. But now the problem's going to be when I do a lookup on the secondary indexes, right? If I store the record ID, the

same idea for the primary key, then in this example here, every single time I update the the version chain, the version, and now I append a new, you know, version at the beginning of the version chain, I have to now update any index that's pointing to it. So yeah, I update the primary key index, but then I have to also update all my secondary key indexes as well. So for one index maybe that's not that big of a deal but if I have a lot of them then to do one update on the tupil for for not even for the

for the keys that this thing might be indexed on not if I update an attribute that not I don't even have an index on because now I'm storing the physical ID the the location of the head of the version version chain I have to update all these indexes means I have to do latch grabbing you know or whatever data structure I'm using and do all that an alternative is to use the logical ID as a way to represent you know an additional indirection layer to take some logical value and get to that verd

chain. So now when I update the head of the virgin chain I don't have to update all my secondary indexes. So this is what my SQL does. So my SQL actually stores the primary key of your of your tupil as the value of any secondary index. So when I do my lookup on my secondary index, you know, you know, from from one key, I get out the primary key and then I do another lookup in the primary key index to then get to the head of the version chain in the case of my SQL because it's indexed on organized storage. Once I get

to the leap node, uh I get my tupil anyway, right? So it's not that big of a deal. But now if I have to update multiple uh if I have many secondary indexes, I don't have to do any I don't have to update all of them whenever the the whenever whenever I update my tupil head in my version chain because they're still always going to point to the primary key index. And if I do that trick I said before where anytime I up I change or modify the primary key of a tupil I treat that followed by delete by an insert then

again I I update all my update all my secondary indexes that way as well. So most data systems that do multi versioning are not going to store version information in the index itself and if it's index or storage implicitly it's down in there but typically they don't do this. Postgress is going to do this because since they're doing oldest and newest and since the version chain may span multiple pages to go look at one tupole I may have to go read multiple pages to avoid having to skin

entire version chain they'll have multiple entries in the index for different versions that allow you to jump to different offsets within the version chain. Of course now when I clean things up I got to go delete those those old version uh uh references but it's they decided it would be faster to do that. uh it it it makes the scans faster but deletes slower. The challenge also going to be now our index still has to support uh duplicate keys from different snapshots. So we talked about how we would handle uh

in secondary indexes if we want to make if if we make the data structure in a BB bus tree handle only unique new keys then if we just append the record ID into the the the key itself that guarantees that every every key I store is unique but the basic same idea applies here that like if I store the record ID and some additional metadata in my key that I'm storing then now I could I could potentially have two keys get inserted into index that would normally conflict logically but physically they don't conflict because

the the bytes I'm actually storing will will will not match. Right? And the reason you need to do this is because the garbage collector may not have come through and cleaned things up. So in the same way I got to go clean up the version chains, I got to go clean up the indexes as well to make sure they're not pointing to things in my version chain that don't exist anymore. So say a transaction T1 starts, it does a read on A, transaction T T2 starts and they're going to update A, right? And

that's going to create a new version like this. But then it's going to delete A. So now the say this transaction goes ahead and commits. The garbage collector hasn't run yet. So my index still has a pointer for for object A, right? On key A still points to the head of my version chain down here. But then another transaction comes along right after the second one is committed and it creates an does insert on a. So now I need to be able to again also update that pointer here. Right? And again logically that's

allowed to happen because t2 is already committed even though physically I'm storing a multiple versions of a and the keys technically conflict. Logically they don't conflict because t1 is t2 is gone. T3 is allowed to go ahead and do do the update because T1 is still running at the top. So now when it when it reads A, you need to be guaranteed that it goes sees the version A1 and not the the newer uncommitted version A3. Even if if A3 the bottom one commits, right? It still needs to be able to see

A1. So the way we would handle this is that we just we we we need to be since we need to now support non-unique keys, we can store some basic versioning information in the in the keys itself that guarantee the the uniqueness and that allows us to find the version that we actually actually want. Right? Because going back here, the virgin chain is not connected because because logically the the insert A in T3 is not the same tupil, same logical tupil that the other two transactions are modifying. They're logically distinct

even though the keys are the same and physically I'm storing them together in the in the in the index. So we need to be able to guarantee that the other transactions can still find the older transactions still find the older versions. All right. And the last one thing I want to cover quick we go is how do we handle deletes. So again like we're going to be we're the garbage is going to be physically deleting old versions but at some point we got to be able to logically delete them and remove the

entire version chain right and so we just need a way to keep track of that that a tuple has been has been deleted. And the easiest way to do this would be you just store a or one way to do this is store in the the header uh a little flag and say this is this is the latest version of this transaction sorry latest version of this logical tool has been deleted. So as I'm scanning along my version chain if I come across that flag I know that okay this thing has been logically deleted even though physically

I can still see it. And then you can determine the transaction the data system can determine whether a transaction is allowed to see that or not. The other approach is actually make a special tombstone tupil that's the end of your version chain so that if you come along you just see that and you know you've been deleted. All right. So here's a quick summary of a bunch of systems that are out there and various ways that they're implementing uh multi version control. As you can see Postgress is there as a

pendon only uh heaton which is a inmemory advance system for for SQL server like a for transactions. They're the only ones that are still still kind of doing appendon. Now any any modern system is be doing the delta storage approach because it's just way more efficient and way more the engineering is is engineering complexity to get good performance is much lower than it is with a depend like in postgress when you run the vacuum and it deletes old versions it doesn't actually recan the me memory

it's only when you run vacuum full or run pg repack does that actually clean things up so I can insert uh a billion tupils commit that transaction then delete a billion tupils and delete that and commit that transaction and poke us won't actually reclaim the storage space. It just hasn't much empty space where we can store things. All right. So again, MVC is the most widely used storage scheme for for mending transactions and and data in a data system. But we kind of need to cover all the basics throughout the

inspector before we can get to everything we're talking about here today. So now you understand what secondary indexes are doing. Now you can understand what you know what the scan operators are doing when it goes tries to read things. And even even database systems that do not support multi-statement transactions like I can call update update update and commit atomically even those systems are going to still do some variation of multi- versioning they just don't support more complex transactions.

All right, next class we we'll be switching over to talk about logging recovery. And then so next week will be the last two lectures you need to actually build a safe reliable database system. Like even though we're not near the end of semester, like the last two pieces are what you need to make sure you don't lose data. And then once we finish next week, then we'll talk about what what happens when we go distributed because that just makes everything harder. Okay, hit it. [music]

Aquat [music] [music] [music] the fortune fame maintain flow with the brain. >> [music] [music]

