[music] [music] I'm still associated. [music] [music] Round of applause if you need your cash [applause] again. take out. So, a quick comment. I uh was going to give you a thank you for being professional this semester. Like my other DJs always had like ex-girlfriend showing up at my office or like you know behind on child support payments, but you've been very professional. I appreciate you being here always on time. So, thank you again for even though this is not over. I was just thinking about this morning. Oh

man, DJ Cash has so many problems. It's kind of nice. Um all right, so guys, a lot to get started, a lot to discuss. Let's get started. Um again for the for you guys in the class the docket is looks like this as we finish up near the end of semester. Homework five is going be due again this Sunday coming up. Project 4 went out last week. The recitation will be tomorrow November 18th at 8 p.m. on Zoom and the link is on Piaza. And again the write up is quite exhaustive uh deliberately so

because transactions are super hard. We're trying to be very thorough on what exactly you need to do uh for project four so you don't you don't get lost. Um, so please read that before you show up to the recitation. And then the final exam is going to be Thursday, December 11th at 1 p.m. It's a three-hour exam. I don't know where it's going to be. They haven't scheduled that yet. Uh, so please don't make travel plans before this date because there's no makeup and

there's no early early exams. Any questions about any of these things? Yes. >> Chris, what happened to the advanced class 721? Uh, other people have emailed me about this. Uh, Jes Patel is the data professor at CMU. uh in the CS department they made him the department chair because nobody else wanted to do it but it's interim department chair uh and as such he they were supposed to find a replacement for him so that he could teach the intro class next semester and I could teach the advanced

class they have not found replacement yet they haven't done the dean hasn't started the external search yet um so at this point there's nobody nobody can teach the class other than me next semester so I can't teach 721 >> you think >> the question is can do I think we find replacement be nice. Yes. Do you want Do you want to be department chair? No. No. I mean, it's a it's a thankless job. Yes. At this point, like I like it's outside my hands. I don't have

control. I apologize, but there's nothing I can do at this point. >> Uh the question is does he get a raise? Again, that's above my pay scale. I don't know, right? All I know is he's teaching the 721 now and being department chair and trying to do like, you know, awesome data research with me. So it's he's not it's not sustainable. So if it gets added back, I will email everyone. But at this point, don't bank on it. >> The question is what? I don't know.

>> I mean, ide like Yeah. Like I can't be like two weeks into the semester. Oh, guys, it's gonna come back. No, like January, early January. But again, don't don't bank on it. Yeah, I'm I'm not happy to It is what it is, but what can you do? Um, you it used to be the intro class was only once per semester because it was just me teaching it. Uh, and the weight list was 500 people, right? And so we we stole gymnast from Wisconsin. Maybe we'll hire somebody else. Uh but even then like

if you hire somebody else in if you hire another Davis per Davis person this year then that person could potentially teach the intro class in the in the fall and then I could teach 721 in the fall but spring is not looking good. Okay. All right. So moving on. Uh what else we have going on? We have a lot of cool data talks coming up tonight or today after this class. We'll have uh Ben who gave the talk in class before from Fyal talk about how they support Iceberg. Now, uh Snowflake is on campus today and

tomorrow. One of my former students is giving a talk tomorrow at uh 12:00. I think the university recruiter is here as well. Uh I don't know what I know they've made some offers, some students for full-time positions. I don't know what the status of internships and um full-time offers beyond that from Snowflake, but they're on campus here if you want to meet up and talk to them. And then the following week we'll have uh it's this is a a system out of the UK called XTDB. This is a weird one. It's a

time series database but it runs on multiple dimensions of time. Uh we don't really cover time series databases in here class but just think of like I want to keep track of like stock ticks when these events occur. And then I also want to keep track of like I have another dimension of time like what would happen if I traded this stock at a at at an earlier point in time. So you have now you have sort of two parallel dimensions running on it. It's wild stuff. This is used not this system but time series

abases are widely used in fintech and trading world. But again that that'll be next week at uh on the zoom seminar. Okay. All right. So last class was the last lecture we did on concurrency tool and we finished up talking about multi version concurrent control and we said this was a mechanism we could allow us to basically make multiple logical vers sorry multiple physical versions of a logical object in our database. So instead of overwriting the the data directly, we'll make a copy or make a an

extra physical version that has either the delta of the change or the actual change itself uh in in our system so that we can do a bunch of tricks of allowing consistent snapshots of the database when we go read things. And we talked about how like not just in MVPC but all the other concurrent protocols we talked about before how the design decisions we make in our concurrent protocols are going to affect all throughout all the other parts of the system because the other parts of the system need to be aware of transactions

and what transactions are doing to uh in the system to make sure we do we're doing things correctly. So what we talked about so far has given us three of the the the properties of assets. So we got atomicity, consistency, and isolation. Today's class and next class, we're going to talk about how we guarantee durability as well as atomicity after a crash. Okay, so here's the motivation of the problem we're trying to solve here today or for this week. We have a transaction T1, which

read on a, write on A, uh, and and then commit, right? So we know how to do reads, right? Ignoring how we find object A, right, in in a page on disk, index, whatever, it doesn't matter, right? We know that in order to read this object, we first got to make a copy of the the page out on disk in our nonvolatile storage, bring that into our buffer pool, hand out the pointer to the execution engine so the operators can can access this data. Then now we want to do a write on a ignoring multi- versioning. Say, you

know, I'm doing a single version system. uh I apply my change directly in my in my my page in my buffer pool, right? And then I go ahead and commit. Again, the property of commit we is that we're we're telling the outside world that all the changes for your your transaction uh have the asset guarantees that we care about, right? So, we've told the outside world that our transaction has committed. But then the problem is if there's a bad storm and there's a major disruption to power

ignoring whether we have battery backups or whatever, doesn't matter. Right? We the system crashes and we lose everything in our in our buffer pool. Of course, the problem here is that we told the outside world that our transaction committed and we applied their change. But now we if we upon recovery, assuming we get power again, when we come back, we're not going to see that modification we made to a because we didn't write it out to disk. So that's the problem we're trying to

solve today and next class. How do we make sure that if we tell the outside world your your connection has committed, how do we make sure that no matter what happens to our database system, even if the data center melts down, uh we won't solve that problem this week. That'll be when we talk about distributed databases, but like the whole thing falls in a giant sinkhole, we can still come back and and recover your your data. So that's the problem we're trying to solve with through crash recovery. The

idea here is that it's the algorithms we're going to implement in our database system so that no matter what happens to our database system as long as we if we tell you that your transaction is committed then we'll guarantee that we'll we'll retain that data and we can guarantee the consistency atomicity properties uh that that we want despite what happens. Now just because you store it and say you committed and even even it is durable someone of course can come along and overwrite your change because the

next transaction but that's okay that's the normal operations of the database. It's really like if things are cra things crash how do we come back and not lose anything. So our recovery algorithm is going to have two parts. The first would be what we'll talk about today and that'll be the things that the data system does during normal operations during normal execution of transactions and queries so that it can set itself up to be able to recover any of those changes if there's

a later crash. And then next class will be how do we go back after a crash look at all the things we're going to record today in our data system to go figure out what what was this what was going on the system at the moment of the crash and how can we reconstruct the state of the database to put us back where where we where we where we should be. Another important thing to understand when we talk about this as well going back to my diagram here ignoring the crash part. But soon as I tell you that

your your your data has been committed like you say I want to commit my transaction as soon as you get back the acknowledgement that the commit was successful then you're guaranteed we should be guaranteed your data will were successfully stored. Now there may be a race condition where you say you want to commit the transaction we can make it safe out on disk but then before we send you the network messages saying your transaction is successfully committed the system crashes before that network

message goes out. That's still okay because it's up for the application to go back and say, "Okay, did my transaction actually commit or not." People don't write code that way. But that's in in theory that's what you're supposed to do. All right. So today we're going to first talk about what we uh the kind of fails we can have and how we want to manage this. And now in our buffer pool because the buffer will again that's where we're staging all the data in memory before we

make any changes to them. We need to be aware of what's going to happen uh when we're allowed to do certain things in our buffer pool. Then we'll talk about the two main approaches to guarantee durability. Shadow paging and write ahead logging. Display me right ahead logging is what you're going to want to use and most data system are going to go ahead and use this. Um then we'll talk about different logging schemes of what you can put in your write ahead log like what data should actually be and then

we'll finish up talking briefly about checkpoints and I'll show a sort of naive checkpoint scheme that works in conjunction with the right head log and then we'll see the problems with it and then next class we'll start off with uh doing better checkpointing. Okay. All right. So at this point in the semester this should not be a shock when I say this but again we've been assuming this this assumption of our sort of conceptual database system we've been talking about through all these lectures

where the primary storage location of the data of the database itself is going to be on nonvolatile storage an SSD spinning disc hard drive S3 it doesn't matter and then because we can't manipulate that data on non storage directly we always got to copy it into our buffer pool which runs in DRAM which is going to be volatile storage, right? And it's going to give us faster access. So, anytime we want to manipulate data, we got to copy into memory, do whatever changes we want we want on on the on

that data, and then we're going to write that dirty data out to disk at some point, right? And again, we can't do by although once it's in memory, we can do bite addressable modifications. The granularity that we're going to interact with data on nonval storage is going to be through pages, 4 kilobytes, 8 kilobytes, or whatever, right? And then the the hardware itself can only ensure that 4 kilobytes be written atomically. So again the property we need to guarantee or need to provide in order to

say we have a durable transactions is that for any changes that a transaction makes once we tell somebody they they transaction has been successfully committed then we then the data has to be durable and of course that means we can't have any partial changes that for any transaction that's been committed. We don't want to like write, you know, they have the transaction modify two pages and only one of them make out the disk or if the database page is eight kilobytes and therefore we got to write

two 4 kilobyte pages out to the hardware. We don't want the first p page to be written but not the second and if we're telling the outside world that our that our transaction has successfully committed. So today is is about understanding like how to make sure that our changes are written out to disk in the right order so that again next class when we crash come back we make sure that we have what we expect to see with and enough information for us to we recover the database back to the correct state.

So the two mechanisms mechanisms we need to have uh are undo and redo and this again this should be kind of obvious when we're setting up to something do something more sophisticated. So undo is be the mechanism we use to remove the effects of an incomplete or aborted transaction. Right? If again that can be hap that can happen because either the transaction itself says it want to abort cause roll back explicitly. The concurrent protocol says you can't commit and the transaction gets rolled back or again

the transaction is in flight or inactive or is active and then we crash. We got to make sure we roll roll things back. redo it with a mechanism that allows us to reapply the changes of of a transaction that has committed. So we want to make sure that we reinstall or install the changes that they did that they when they were normally running so that again upon recovery it looks like you know we not looks but it is it is as if that transaction fully executed or did fully execute. So how we're going to support undo and

redo is going to depend on the policies we're going to have in in our buffer pool. Let's go back to this example here. Now we have two transactions. T1's going to do read on A, write on A. T2 is going to read on B and write on B. Again, I'm showing all this, you know, we're just sort of moving pages back and forth between buffer pool and disk. There's still going to be the concern protocols that we talked about before like two-phase locking or or OC. All that's still going to happen above all this as

well, but we're ignoring that for today's class because in this example here, they don't conflict. Therefore, they can write independently. So T1's going to start want to read on A. It's not in our buffer pool. So, we know how to go out and disc and get it. We fetch it into fetch the page and we store it in our buffer pool. Now, we're going to do a write on A and we'll update A uh A equals 3 there. Now, there's a context switch where T2 starts. It does a read on B. That's

already in the buffer pool. So, that's fine. We can read that that page. And then now we're going to do a write on B and set B's value to eight. Now, B wants to commit. Right? Again assuming this is one page with three three cells or three blocks in it. So at this point here we need to make sure before we tell the application that T2 has successfully committed its changes have been written out the disk. Right? The problem is in the same page as where B is located there's also A.

So the question is should we allow A's dirty change be written out the disk as well because it's not committed. So let's say we do write it out put a equals 3 and B equals 8 and you update that that single page out on disk. Right? So now we tell T2, haha, congrats, your transaction has been success to the committed and they're happy. But now when T1 starts running up again now they invoke roll back and now we need to make sure before we uh proceed any further uh we don't have to block when on the

roll back request. So the application says roll back we'll immediately come back say yep got it no problem right but now it's our job and and the database system to go clean things up. So now we got to make sure that we go remove the effects of T1 uh in that page because we flush it out the disk. So, what's one one way to do that? It's not your question. It's kind of obvious, right? Go uh go fetch the page back in, see that it matches what I have now, and undo the effects of T1.

Do you think it's a good idea or a bad idea? Is it correct for one page? Yeah. But always think strange. What if I have a billion pages? Do I really want to go out like and bring back in a billion pages, reverse changes, and write them all back out again? No. Because what happens also too if I crash halfway through that updating a billion things? Now I got a bunch of torn rights I got to go clean up. So there be two policies that are affect what the data system is allowed to write out to disk and when is it allowed to

write out the the pages to disk. The first is going to be called the steel policy and this determines whether the data system the data system is allowed to evict a dirty object again think of page a dirty object from the buffer pool that's been modified by a transaction that has not committed and therefore is allowed to overwrite whatever the most recent committed version of of that object out in nonvault storage out out in our disk. So if if steel is enabled, then you're allowed to evict things and overwrite

what's out on disk. If no steel is enabled, then you're not allowed to do this. So this all ties back up to ties together with the project one now because now in your in your replacement policy algorithm like ARC or LRUK, whatever you're using, it's got to be aware of what which of these ones you're actually doing because it has to then determine if I have a dirty page, am I allowed to write it out or not? And I'll say also too, I'm showing you steal no steal. It's not like you do you

do steal for some transactions, steal for no steal for other transactions. Like your implementation only does one of these. >> The qu the question is if it's no steel then some transactions may never be allowed to finish. pages. >> Yes, we'll get there in a second. Yes, this the thing the thing they point out which they are correct that if I'm not allowed if I am not allowed to write uncommitted pages out the disk then how would I ever handle a billion updates where I can't everything fit in

memory? You can kind of get around that by writing things to the side but we'll get that in a second. All right. The other policy is is is called the force policy. And this says this determines whether the data system is required to flush all the dirty pages from a transaction uh that they're modified by transaction before the transaction is allowed to commit. So when I get that commit message from the application, I don't respond back and say yes, you've successfully committed until all the pages that it's modified

in the buffer pool have been written out to disk. And if I say no force, then I don't require that, right? So forcing is going to make it easier for us to do recovery later on because I don't have to worry about whether a transaction has has all it changes made out to disk or not. Right? If I'm totally committed, then I got them all all out on disk. I still may have to clean things up to make sure I handle torn transactions. All right. So let's look at an example of no steal and force. Again, no steal

means that I'm not allowed to evict dirty pages before transaction commits. And then force means that when a transaction gets I do I have to write all of the changes out to disk. So I start off again. T1 does a read on A. I fetch that page, bring it to memory. Then I do the write on A. I update that single record in the page. Context switch over to T2. T2 does a read on B. That's fine. That's in memory. Does a write on B. That's in memory. We overwrite the existing value. Now I go

ahead and commit. And again under the force policy before I can tell the application that T2 is successfully committed I got to write out that page that it modified. But the problem is in that page I also have changes from T1 on A but T1 is not committed. So no steel says I can't write out that that page at all. So I have this sort of conflict here that says one transaction says flush everything. The other transaction is not allowed to flush anything. So a simple way to handle this is just make a copy of the page only include the

change from the uncommitt from from the transactions that's committing into that new page and then that gets written out to disk. >> Yes. The question is why is no preventing us from writing out that that page because I can't write pages I can't write uh modifications from transactions that have not committed yet. They just have to be in the same page. Yes. >> Question is how do I know the original data of the page? We're getting there in a second, but assume there's a there's a

your transaction maintains a some metadata like the undo redo to know what it changed and what it changed it from. >> Question is, what if there's no space to make the copy? Correct. Yes, you're you're point poking holes to this. Yes. I'm not saying this is a good idea. This is the straw man. So, yes. >> Yes. It's kind of similar, but I was is it an option to just wait? >> The question is, is it an option to wait on T1? I mean, wait for T1 to to wait for T1 to do what? Sorry.

>> Well, who's waiting T2 is waiting for T1? >> T2. >> The question is, >> so yeah, in this case here, should just T2 yield for T1 and wait till T1 does something that I can decide what to do. Shadow paging will do this, but how long should you wait? What if you know what if a person in T1 you know walks was typing at the terminal walks away. So the data bricks talk talked about this. So they said that people in like notebooks in in data bricks people start transactions and

then they get up and walk away and then so they had to set an automatic timeout to kill transactions if they run for 24 hours. Do I want to wait 24? Should T2 wait for 24 hours? No. All right. So the advantage of this now if we do this approach it's really treatable for us to roll back T1 now because we just go reverse the change in our page and we didn't none of its changes made it out to disk right the no steel prevent us that so we don't do any clean up with no steel because we know

whatever's been out out on disk is from transactions that have committed so that's good so I was saying it's a strong man this is this is the easiest thing to implement right uh again of course the problem is you have to have enough memory so that you can maintain the set uh in memory, you know, without running at the disk. Assuming you can do that. Uh then this is pretty simple to do and it makes recovery trivial because again when you come back on the disc is going to look exactly the way it should uh

because this is only contain uh information from committed transactions. That's not entirely true either in the example I'm showing here because there's no metadata. There's no addition metadata to say that all the changes from a committed transaction have been written out to disk. In my toy example, they're only writing one page and that can be done. We can assume that that's done atomically. So the way you really implement no steel and force is through a technique we talked earlier on talked about earlier

on called shadow paging. And this is what IBM invented in the in the 1970s on system R. This is the first way they they wanted to implement and support uh durable transactions in one of the first relational database systems. I don't know what ingress did in in the early days and Oracle came later and Oracle didn't didn't do this. So the basic idea is that shadow paging is that you maintain two copies of the database. Uh the master copies is only it's contain changes from only committed transactions

and then the shadow copy is sort of temporary space where uncommitted transactions are making making changes um and can write them out to to disk if necessary to swap them out in order to get space. uh but because they're not overwriting the the the master copies then then this is okay. So that now if I crash come back I just ignore what whatever's in the shadow copy database because the master only contains the the data from committed transactions. And then to make sure that we know that

all of our changes from a trans from from a committed transactions have been successfully made it out to disk, I'm gonna have a single record called the the the master record, which is basically the a pointer that says here's the the here's the the latest page table. Here's the current page table of the of the database system or sorry not page table directory. Here's the current page directory that I know that only contains changes from committed transactions. So once my transaction commits and I write

all those pages out to disk, I just flip a pointer now in a single record which I can do atomically to say now you're pointing to the new page directory. So this again this technique is old but it's very rare. We'll talk a little bit why IBM abandoned this later on. Uh the probably the most famous system that uses this approach is LMDB. Again he's the opposite of me. He loves MAP. He loves shadow paging. Uh, and he he's very voc vocal about this and we'll see how roughly how they do it. Um,

but it has some limitations. Couchb does this as well. Uh, they're going to get around the the the the fragmentation problem by only appending to the appending the shadow pages to to the end of the database file. Of course, you have to do garbage collection and clean that up. Fast DB is out of Russia. Gemstone, that's a randos system that's pretty old. And then SQL light did this originally, but they got rid of it and they switched over to the right head log. We'll see that in a second.

>> Question where are the shadow pages? Uh do the example and you'll see. Yeah, but both it's in both. Right. This is also going to look a lot like multi- versioning but now it's being done at the granularity of a page instead of a single record. Right? And then we talked about taking uh page locks when we talked about the sort of the hierarchy of of of locks um and pages were in there but I didn't really discuss discuss them. You would use page locking for this kind of stuff.

All right. So we have our master pointer that's pointing to the the master page table page directory but all the same. Um but it's basically in memory a mapping through a page ID to some location in on on disk. So then now when a transaction starts, say T1 comes along and it starts, it's going to create a p a a shadow page table that's going to basically in the beginning just contain the exact same uh records and pointers to those pages out out on disk because there's been no changes made yet. But

then as T1 modifies things and modifies data and pages, instead of overwriting the the the master record database, we're going to say make a copy of that data first. make a copy of that page on on disk or in in and in memory and then write all our changes to to there and then same thing as we update other pages we're going to make make more more copies of them. Now any other transaction that comes along uh that's read only, right? Well, they're they're going to always go to the master pointer which is going to

take them to the master page table. So they'll see the the the the master version of the database. they're not going to see any of the changes from from uh from the first transaction, right? So, LMDB does this. LMDB only allows one writer transaction and can have multiple reader transactions because they're essentially hide hiding things this way. You don't have to, but it it makes things a lot easier. All right. So then now T1 wants to commit. So, what we're going to do is that we're

going to make sure that we update the master pointer to now point to the the new page directory with all all our shadow pages that we we've installed. And then once we know that's been flushed and safe out on disk, then now we're essentially flipping the pointer to point to the master page the shadow p the old shadow page table comes to the new master page table. Any other transaction that comes along after we've done this the switch over, we'll now see the changes that T1 made.

And if we crash and come back, we look in that the master pointer on disk and we would know which page directory we should be looking at. So we we won't lose any of the changes from this transaction once we set said it's committed. And then just like a multi version, we have to do garbage collection. So eventually at some point we got to make sure we we throw away the old page table and then clean up any of the the the invalidated older version pages, right? And then we can just re reuse them for

for future transactions. >> Yes. >> Question. Does this only allow one writer in my example here? Yes. It doesn't have to. It's just now you got to do the the thing he was he he was asking about like all right well when do I switch my master pointer over because I don't want to switch it over with a transaction that hasn't committed yet. So now I got to wait for all the transactions to say oh we're going to commit. Then I then I can do a group fit that way. If you allow multiple writers,

if you have if you only allow one writer transaction, then you don't have to do that. So, so, so that you can you can get around this a little bit like uh if you do page level locks, then your transaction is updating some pages. My transaction is updating other pages. I can't read your rights. That's fine. I I go ahead and commit. I update the the master pointer to now point to the new master page table, but I make sure it doesn't include any your changes. and I immediately establish a new shadow page

table with all your uh inflight changes you can do but but it's it's more work and what LMDB does I'm showing like an example here of like there's a single master pointer but they the the data they're doing index organized storage so the index is actually the data itself so in that case you just change the root of the B+ tree you swap that to the new pointer and then that gives you the switch between the master and the shadow Say it again. >> The question is this a naive way to do

multi merging. So I'll talk about this in a second but like all these ideas like between multi- version current control this logging stuff we're talking about the shadow paging stuff we're talking about here we talk about log structure merge trees all these things kind of are very similar to each other but oftent times they're treated as separate concepts because the way you sort of abstract the concerns of the system so there's a lot of redundancy in this right uh we'll talk about post in a

second post didn't have a right log because they send they assumed I make a copy of the people and I'd write that out and that was the log but the performance reasons right then down below that you have like your file system that's doing journaling too that's maintaining its own log as well and then go even lower than that now you got on the actual like SSD it's doing logging down there too so it's a lot lot of redundancy but like it's just you know unless you control the entire stack

which nobody actually can uh it's all kind of unavoidable except Oracle But uh but even then I I like they're probably still running on a journaling file system, right? There's they're still going to do right ahead logging. They're not a log structure storage system, right? So How does this ensure >> atomicity? >> The question is how does shadow paging ensure atomicity? All right. So going back here, transaction wants transaction T1 wants to commit. Okay, so it modified

three pages. So we need to make sure those three pages are get installed and everyone can see them at you know at the moment we say this thing's been committed. Okay. So I can't I can't guarantee that I can do flushing to those three pages out on disk atomically, right? So I need I need some way to guarantee through one right atomic right on disk that these things have been installed. So that's what the master pointer does. That's a single page say at the head header of of the

file and I can guarantee I can write that atomically. So once now I install all the changes uh for this transaction those those three pages in blue then now to switch it over I need to atomic write to the master pointer record once that's been installed then I know now that anybody comes along and reads the master pointer is going to see the shadow page table and would see my three changes. So this guarantees that no matter how many pages I modify that they all get installed automically and with a single

parent swap everyone sees them. Okay. So swinging rollbacks is super easy. As I said if if your transactions in flight and I crash come back I ignore what I ignore what what what was in the shadow shadow pages right? [snorts] If a transaction aborts while running, same thing. I throw away the shadow pages uh for the inflight transaction that got aborted and then don't update it. Don't update the pointer. So, no one's going to see any of the changes anyway, right? So, the the problem with this is that

copying that page table is is expensive. Now, LMDB gets gets away from that doesn't have have this problem because they're copying sort of paths through trees uh through a B+ tree, right? Um but if I if I have to copy the entire tree or I have to copy the entire um uh the entire page table then that's expensive especially for large databases this becomes problematic. The other challenge is that going back here now I have a bunch of empty space or empty pages in my my database file. Now

I can maybe get around that by by creating a new file every single time. So I I don't worry about all these empty pages, but at some point I got to be able to reclaim them. And in the case of system R, the problem they had when they were running shadow paging is that since they're trying to since sequential IO is so much faster than random IO, now I have a bunch of gaps in my tables that I got to jump over and ignore and and that starts to look more like random IO the more the more fragmentation I have. So

over time, the database would get slower and slower and slower and then you have to run expensive garbage collection to go go clean all that up. And again the 1970s the hardware was like super slow you know this this became really problematic back then. >> Yes. >> Yeah. So the question is um is still this still concerned on SSDs go even faster than SSDs. So we were looking at uh the Optane stuff from Intel persistent memory. So it was like DRAM but it was persistent. So it had the speed of DRAM but like you could you

could ensure your your rights got actually were durable. And in that environment the the shadow copying or shadow paging uh if remember correctly still did not perform as well as uh as like right head logging because you have to do uh because you do copy and writes the copies kill you at that at that point. So if the disc is slower, the disc rights are are that that's what kills you. If it's if it gets faster now, the mem copying you're doing in this world gets slower. I don't think

this is a few this a few years ago. Optane is dead. Of course, you can't buy the hardware, but um I still think I find still hold today, but I have to go I would have to go look again. >> Question. If it was an SSD, do are we are we do we care about hover prefetching? What do you mean? >> Yeah. Yeah. Statement is like I I want things to be as sequential as possible. Uh because that's again if I'm doing scans it's going to be faster and so even the LMDB stuff because it's a tree

structure things are more scattered. But if you're only doing point queries maybe not big not that big of a deal but anything beyond that the having everything sequential still helps. And again you say oh is it multi versioning isn't that going to have the same kind of fragmentation? Well, no. If I do it the MySQL Oracle way where I do uh newest to oldest and most queries only need the newest data, then the the main table itself is going to have the data I want and I don't have to go look at the

the delta records. >> Yes. >> Yes. So the question is going back here uh when I showed sort of the the straw man approach I had to make this copy here for the page because two transactions modify the contents of the page and I can only one of them is allowed to write things out. So I had to make a copy and make sure that copy didn't include the changes from the first transaction. Assuming I have a single writer under shadow paging, this problem doesn't occur because only one transaction is

allowed to modify a page. So you might take a lock on the whole page. So I when I write out the disk, I'm only writing out the disk. Uh I'm only it's only going to become the master version when the transaction goes goes and commits. And because I'm doing a single writer, it won't contain commit changes from uncommitted transactions. So I don't have this problem. If you have multiple writers, then you have to do that reversal thing I said before, right? But if you take page

level locks, exclusive locks on pages, then two transactions can't write to the same page under the scheme. Okay. So I I don't want to dwell too much on shadow paging because again nobody does this or very few systems do it. Um the I do want to show what SQLite used to do. So, SQLite did a version of shadow paging called roll back mode uh up until 2010. Then they got rid of this uh and now they now they use right ahead log by default. I think you still can switch it back on if you wanted to for like uh uh

compatibility reasons. It's famously backwards compatible for like the seagullite guarantees that the single light file format will be supported until 2035, right? Because again this thing's running in satellites, it's running in planes. like this is a critical piece of infrastructure. You need to make sure that it runs forever, right? Um so that's what you're very unlikely current version of SQLite SQLite 3. You're very like unlikely to see SQLite 4 anytime soon. All right. So the way it would

work is that uh there wouldn't be a uh there wouldn't be a sort of page table. There'd be a separate journal file. And what would happen is anytime I wanted to make a change to a page in memory but from a transaction and by the way SQL light was like LMDB one writer multiple readers. So only one writer thread. We don't worry about concurrent updates from different transactions. So before I modify page two in memory, I'm going to make a copy of it and flush it out to disk in the special file called the

journal file. Right? That was that was separate from the main database file. Then once that's been flushed, then I go ahead and make my change to page two in memory. Same thing. I want to modify page three, right? I make a copy to the page in the in the journal file and I go ahead and then modify page three. Then when you know when I want to say my transactions committed now I got to make sure that all these changes have been written out. So I start writing out page two to disk right flush that that's

fine. But then I as I start trying to write page three during this commit process there's a system crash and I lose all my contents on my buffer pool. Right? So again going back here in order for me to say the transactions committed I got to write page two and then write page three. And once I know that's done, then I can tell the outside world you've committed. But if I crash before then, then upon recovery, when I come back, the first thing I'm going to go do is look in this journal file and figure out

what was in there. Again, these are the copies of the data before I I I made any changes. So, I'm going to go bring in page two and page three back into memory. And I know that these this is should be the current version of these pages before I start running new transactions. All right? in order to say I completed the recovery process, I got to make sure that whatever got from the journal file is is what matches what's actually in the database file itself. So I'll go ahead and take take page two and make

sure I just overwrite whatever's in in the the database file for page two. And I'll do the same thing for page three. Since I don't know what's in there, I know I got to just overwrite it to make sure that it's it's the version I I expect. >> What mean if it didn't commit? Uh what didn't commit? Sorry. Right. The question is uh what if there's action that modify page three doesn't commit? Well, that's this case here, right? So, page three isn't written down

the disk. I crash come back. I don't care. I don't care what is in this thing. The journal file says these these are the this is the page before the transaction started running. So, if I have things in my journal file that I know there's a transaction that that didn't commit successfully. So, I need to go take whatever's in my journal file and make sure it goes back down into my database file. >> No, no, no. So, the journal file is before the change, right? So, again, like

>> Yeah. So, I'm saying like maybe it's hard to read. There's the block boxes are blue. So, I might maybe I change a page two, maybe page three. Blue boxes only the blue box page two got written. That crashes. So, then I bring up the white boxes for page two and three. Yes, I should make that more clear on it looks good in the slides. It doesn't look good in the overhead or it's clear on the overhead. Not not as clear on the overhead, right? So, it's kind of like it's the

opposite of the of the shadow paging where like I the master page would tell me here's things that uh here are the there's in my shadow page table I have changes from uncommitted transactions that I just ignore. the journal file is like here's the things you need to roll back and undo because there might transaction might have modified these pages and then and then it didn't commit. You make sure the those things get reversed. >> Yeah, the statement is correct. Yes. So after I after I replay the journal file,

bring that back into memory, write them back back out the disk, then I delete the journal file and then I can start executing new transactions again. So we can give a demo next class, but like if you go read the like the debug log of any pick your favorite data system, it'll say when it first boots up doing recovery and it's it's looking in the log, looking at checkpoints, trying to figure out or it's it's got a journal file looks in that. It's trying to figure out what was going on at the time

I when I when the last time I was running because it may not may have not been a clean shutdown. Okay, so as we said before, shadow paging requires us to do a bunch of random IO's to potentially non-ontiguous pages on disk. Even the the SQL light method, right? Those pages were right next to two and three, but like they could have been all different parts of the file and have no bunch of random IO to write them out. And we said in the beginning of the of the semester and we we've repeated this

many times, sequential IO is going to be faster than random IO even on modern SSDs. And therefore, we want to choose algorithms where we we can maximize amount of scentual IO that we're doing. And ideally, we want to be able to choose algorithms where we don't have to write entire pages out to disk, even if only a small portion of it, a small portion of that page has been the disk. Right. So, Calcb is is is going to get rid of the the the random IO problem because they're just going to append the

shadow pages to the end of the file and then truncate it later later on and do do sort of compaction like a log structure registry. But they're still going to have to copy the entire page out to disk even if only a small portion of it has been written. So, the solution to this is going to be the write ahead log. And as I said, this is what pretty much every single data system that supports durable transactions and recovery is been doing this approach. So the idea is that we're going to maintain a separate log file uh on disk

or non-model storage that's separate from the database file and that we're that's going to contain all the changes that transactions make to the database while they're running. And we're going to assume that the log itself is going to have enough information for us to allow to undo and redo any transaction that has come along and either committed or or did not commit. And the most important thing you got to understand about the redhead log is this paragraph right here. And that is the

database system is not allowed to write out any page that's been modified by a transaction from the buffer pool cannot write that out to disk before the log record that corresponds to those changes have has been safely written out to disk. Right? Why it's called the write ahead log because you're writing ahead to the log before you write to the database system. There is right behind logging for the experimental hardware that he and I were talking about. We did that and you actually want to write to the database

first before the log. That's only in research land. Don't do that for real, right? It has to be before. And so with this, this is allow us going to do steel and no force. So steel is going to allow us to write out uncommitted changes or changes from uncommitted transactions before the transactions committed. But again, we got to make sure we write the log records first before those pages get written to disk. And then no force says that we don't require the data system to flush out all the pages that that

transaction is modified when the trans transaction is committed. But we got to write out the log records for that transaction first before we tell the outside world you've committed. So that means that if a transaction modifies a thousand pages, there'll be a thousand log records at least for for those changes. And all those thousand log records we got to write to disk. But we can do that sequentially with with a fewer number IO's versus doing random IO's for all those thousand pages as we would have to do in shadow

paging and other techniques. The question is do are people doing shadow paging because no steel and force is easier to implement. Yes. But like it's [clears throat] like you can do it quick and dirty pretty easily because right head log we'll see as go along it's a it's a bit more complicated. And then when you throw checkpoints in that's hard because now you got to be able to handle what if I crash and recover and then dur my recovery I crash again. That's hard. Shadow paging doesn't have that problem.

All right. So, again, I'll sort of go through this quickly, but for force and steel, right, if I do force, it's trivial to do. Uh, but I want to be able to do steel because I want to be able to write out pages before transactions committed, right? So, again, this is repeating what I said like if you do force on every update, you flush all the pages before they go to disk. If I do no steel, then I got to I can't flush anything out before transactions committed. But it it makes it trivial

for us to do roll backs on a board of transactions because you just throw away everything in memory and nothing's out on disk. If I'm doing no force, then in order for me to cover after crash uh on I need to maintain log information to know that transactions committed and make sure I can redo any of the changes so I don't lose them. And then if I'm doing steel as well, I I can flush any dirty pages out the disc, even the transaction, even the transition still running, but I need to make sure I can

undo those changes later on if I crash and come back. So, let me walk through this and then hopefully this make more sense. So, again, now we're going to have uh this these log records we're going to maintain for transactions, but now we need a place to store them. So there'll be some some some area in memory that we where we're going to basically append changes to to uh we're going to append the changes to our to this this b memory buffer as transactions make them. It says usually backed by buffer pool.

That's usually not the case. Right. It's just memory. Right. Right. And then again all the log records for transaction uh for the pages they modified have to be written to disk non-focal storage before the page itself is allowed to be overwritten. So again in your buffer pull replacement policy when you or the background writer when you go through and start evicting pages and writing them out to disk you got to make sure the log records that dirty those pages those are written to disk. And we'll see how we're going to track

that next class using log sequence numbers. you basically keep track of a you know a number that says here's the log record that corresponded to this change I know it's been written to disk therefore I can evict this page and then we don't tell the outside world that our transaction is fully committed until all its log records have been written to uh non-ausal storage stable storage is the same thing all right so the way it's going to work is that when a transaction starts we're

going to put a begin record into the log uh as represent its starting It's kind of not unnecessary for today's class, but next class we'll see it because we need to know when a transaction showed up uh when we do recovery to figure out where like the the demarcation line is at starting point starting point of the transaction. Then anytime that transaction makes a change to an object, we're going to record a new log record that keep track of it transaction ID, the object ID of of what got modified, then the before

value for undo and the after value for redo. If we're doing multi version concurrency control the postgress way, we don't actually need need the undo value because we're never un we're never overwriting things. We're always making a new copy of it. But again, for for um to be, you know, super careful, we we'll record both. Then when a transaction finishes and say that it gets committed successfully, then we're going to append this commit record to the log. And then we need to make sure that all the uh log

records that come before this commit for that transaction get written out to disk before we come back with acknowledgement say your transaction has successfully committed. Now this means that we may be writing out log records from transactions that have not committed yet. But that's okay because we haven't written the commit record yet for them. So again when we crash and come back we see a bunch of changes a bunch of log records for changes but then not the commit we know we need to reverse that

you know undo that transaction. So is it okay for write us to write out changes from transactions in in our log records that have not committed yet? All right. So when transaction T1 starts, there's a write on a, right? We pend a log record that says our transaction has begun, right? And then now when we do a write, the first thing we got to do is update uh append a log record in the in the right hand log buffer that corresponds to the change. So our transaction is T1. We're modifying object A and then we have the

before and after value. And then once that's in, you know, written written appended to the log, everything everything's still in memory here. So that's fine. So that's fast. We append that log record. And then we go ahead and make our change to to the actual the data object itself. Then we do uh another item B. Same thing, append the log record, then modify the page. Then when our transaction commits, we put a log record in to say T1 has committed. Then we do an F-sync, flush that out to disk. And

then once now the hardware comes back or the OS comes back with an acknowledgement saying that our change has been flushed to disk, then we can tell the outside world that our transaction is committed. Yes. >> The question is we never put the values in non mean in the buffer pool. Yeah, that's the whole point. That's fine, right? Because everything I need if there's a crash, everything I need to be able to recover the database if there's a crash is in the is in the log, right? So again, if if I get blasted by,

you know, power outage or whatever that OS crashes or whatever, right? That's okay because everything I need to replay that transaction is up above in the redhead log and I can bring that in memory upon recovery. Next class we'll talk about how we handle that and I can just replay the transactions changes of course now if I have to flush uh the log for every single transaction in order to say it's committed right if the log flush on a fast SD takes you know one to five milliseconds then that's going to really become a

bottleneck in my system right best case scenario if if a log flush takes one millisecond and I can only run a thousand transactions a second. That's and that's that's super slow. Like some sites want to run 100 thousands of transactions a second or a million transactions a second. So the way to get around that is through a simple optimization called group commit where when a transaction wants to go ahead and commit then uh it'll wait until a small timeout period right think of like every five milliseconds the

system will say if I have any un if I have any changes from uh from a transaction that wants to commit after this timeout I'm going to go ahead and write write it all to disk. I'm basically batching together a bunch of changes in my my buffer pool, sorry, in my my log buffer and then those things can all get get written out together. So I'm not blocked waiting for one commit after after another. >> Say it again. >> When you say when you say queries, what what do you mean?

>> Question is, can a transaction only commit in five minutes to get intervals? That's pretty good. Yeah, because I can commit whatever 10,000 transactions in that five milliseconds. I would say the the general rule of thumb in in databases is that anything below 50 milliseconds is good enough. If you get into high frequency trading, those guys do cocaine, they want to be under a millisecond, right? They want microcond level. But most websites like the 50 milliseconds is is is is the the

upper bound of what you want to be for a transaction for bit time. And this comes from like internet uh advertising auctions. Like when you go visit a website, assuming you're not using Ublock Origin, uh then when you visit a website, the you know the Google ads or whatever the the ad broker sends bid requests to a bunch of other other advertising brokers and they come back and say, you know, whether they want to how much they want to pay to show you an ad or something, right? And the the the

timeout request for that is like 50 milliseconds or less, maybe 40 milliseconds. So you have basically you get a request, you need do some kind of run a transaction and come back with a response within 40 milliseconds. >> Say it again. >> Is there overhead? >> Yeah, there's network overhead. So yeah. So like but say that the deadline you got to be back in 50 millconds. So say like you get request you have 40 millconds to figure out what you want to do and send out, right? Or anytime you

like update a website like you want to be back 50 millconds is the general rule of thumb. So if I if I'm committing every five milliseconds, that's good enough. That's pretty good. All right. So again, the way it works like this is that now we're going to have two log buffers, right? So T1 starts, it begins a transaction. We put our entry in the first log buffer, does a right on A, ends up there. Again, assuming I'm not showing updating the pages in the buffer pool. Assume we're

doing that, too. Then I do a right on B. Contact switch over to T2. T2 does a begin, does a right on C, does a right on D. Uh, before we do the right on D, though, our buffer pool is full. So now we can go ahead and asynchronously flush this out to disk. But in the meanwhile, now we just switch over now to using the second log buffer. So we write all our changes there, right? And then say now there's a stall and we get we go ahead and do a bunch of commit. And at this point here, the first transaction T1

will wait until the timeout to do group commit uh in the second log buffer. And then when when that happens, again, think of like in milliseconds, then we write out the change from the second log buffer out to disk. Right. So basically I'm showing two buffers here. You could have more than more than two. I could basically always be writing things out to disk and they're all sequential writes because I'm just appending to this log file. I'm not doing random IO. So this is pretty efficient and pretty fast to do. Yes.

>> The question is what do you do for HFT guys? uh they usually run inmemory databases and then they can do uh they they replicate >> they don't they don't fail. Yeah. They're also not running on like machines you find behind the dumpster like they're running on high-end machines that like they're fall tolerant. Then there's a whole another class of of databases called uh super false databases. We're getting we're getting ahead of ourselves. Um, but there's a system called non-stop SQL

that's basically it's like NASA level replication. So like you run a transaction, it runs in parallel on three machines and they all come back and say yes, we did the same thing. Like you they they do that kind of stuff, right? They also they they build their own hardware or like they like they'll they'll run fiber under like the Hudson River to get an extra five millisecond lower latency from like the the data center into like the trading headquarters. they like you know they're just minting money they do

whatever right all right but the core idea is still basically still the same all right so uh again as I said before there's a lot seems like a lot of overlap what I'm talking about here uh for there's a right head log versus like a log structure storage we talked about before or append MVPCC and yes there there is a lot of um sort of duplicated ideas here I will say though in the case of log structure merries they're still going to have a write ahead log for the mem table, right? The

mem table is like that skip list a B+ tree that's in memory that's absorbing all the writes and then eventually gets full and you then you compact it into an SS table and write that out to disk for that mem table piece. Since that's not durable, it's in memory, they're going to maintain a write ahead log for that as well. Then once you know that the the mem table has been converted to an SS table and written out to disk, you can then truncate the log. So even though log structure storage kind of looks like

the same, they're still going to maintain a a separate log file as well doing the same things we're talking about here. All right. So now again if we go look at again steel steel steel yeah no steel versus steel and no force versus force policies you can break up the the the the sort of performance characteristics of these two approaches uh based on what happens when the system is running during normal operations and what happens during recovery. And part of the reason why most systems are going to use

no steel and force and with with the right ahead log is that it's be the fastest approach to use for uh during normal operations. If I assume my data is not going to fail every 5 seconds which you know if it does you have other problems like you assume my system is not going to fail all the time then write ahead log approach is actually going to be faster. And so then you pay the penalty for slow recovery. But again, if I don't think I'm going to crash that often or if I start replicating things the way that I

was briefly mentioning there, then it's less of an issue, right? And the reason why the recovery be faster with force and no steel is that I don't have to do any undo or redo like in the shadow paging case. I just come back and I ignore whatever's in the shadow page table and I'm I'm good to go. My data is consistent. All right. So, in my example so far in PowerPoint, I've been showing like, oh, here's T1. I'm showing the log recurses. Here's T1. I'm modifying object A and then here's a

before and after value. But in actual system, we have to be more more concrete and and understand what we're actually going to store in our logs. And there's basically three approaches to do this. wanted to do what's called physical logging where we're storing a bite level diff of the changes we're making to a specific page at a specific offset uh in in that page right think like making a diff patch uh in git or in in in Linux another approach is do logical logging where I store the actual query that uh

made the changes to the database like the actual literal the SQL string itself And then that way when I crash I just come back and replay the the re reexecute the SQL query. [snorts] And then a hybrid approach is sort of physiological where I don't want to be I don't want to store the exact lot the actual SQL query itself but I maybe don't want to store bite level discs. uh I want to be able to just keep track of like here's the pages I modified and then here's a highle change

of what I modified my page so that upon recovery I don't have to make sure the page is exactly the way it was well before the data can decide to reorganize and move things around within within that page itself and things still work out the same and and I don't lose any data I'll say also too that what I'm not talking about so far is you know we assuming we're modifying tupils, but we have other data structures we need to make sure they're safe on disk as well. Indexes, right? Indexes are

basically a second copy of of data. So, in addition to writing out log entries for page the data pages themselves, I want to write out log entries for my uh for my indexes as well. So, upon recovery, I want I want to restore them because otherwise if I have to rebuild the index, I got to read the whole table all over again and repopulate it. And that's what the inmemory database guys do. Uh if you assume your primary storage database is in memory like in in HFT world they they do this a lot where

I'm you say I'm not going to pay the penalty for writing log records for the indexes uh so that I can I can rebuild them more efficiently when I crash. I'm just going to read the whole since I have to read the whole database anyway and bring it to memory. I'll re I'll rebuild the index when I bring it to memory and then they end up doing less logging. All right. So let's say sample query select update fu set value equals xyz where id equals 1. Again in phys in physical logging again it's lowle diff

of what's actually in the bytes. So I would say in this page at this offset I want to write these values and I again I still have to have before and after value because I want to know what what was there before. I want to know what what I want to install in it. And I I would have to do the same thing for for the index. In logical logging, I just record the query to say, hey, there's transaction T1 and here's the update query that it ran. Of course, now the challenge with this one is

in this case here, it's pretty simple, right? We're setting setting a value the value XYZ setting to an exact value. If I have things in like a random function, time functions, I need to make sure that when I replay the log that I get the same values for those function calls as I did when I first ran them because I don't want to run this update query, get today's, you know, today's date and time, then I crash and recover it and replay the same query and get tomorrow's date and time, right? Because then then

my changes aren't durable and that's bad, right? But obviously, you know, if I update a billion tupils with my one update query, I I only need to put one log record for that update. Whereas like physical logging, you got to record a billion billion log records for them, assuming they're across a billion pages. And then physio logical again, it may may seem more nuanced, but again, basically think about it as yeah, I got to show what page I'm updating, but now I'm just going to say what slot number

I'm modifying because that's corresponding to a logical tupole within within the page. And then the slot can change this loc where the slot is pointing to in the page can change. Uh and then upon recovery I can move things around and I still have the freedom to you know I have the freedom to reorganize things but then still know how to apply the changes correctly. And then same thing for the for the indexes as well. So logical logging is nice because you end up lighting writing a lot less data

for uh the changes you make to your database. But the challenge is going to be as I said for you have time stamps and other non-deterministic functions you make sure they are deterministic upon recovery and likewise if I have transactions running at different isolation levels uh I need to make sure I replay the log in that in the same ordering as I did when I actually executed them. So I need to maintain more metadata about the ordering of the actual true ordering of transactions when they actually executed not the

logical ordering necessarily. The other thing about logical logging too is if your if the query you get logged took took an hour to run, there's no magic wand that can make that query run faster upon recovery. So if it took a query it took a qu if a query took an hour to run during no operations, when I crash and come back, it's going to take an hour again to run that same query. So recovery could could be potentially slow. So most systems do not do logical logging. Most systems are going to do

physiological logging. Yes. The >> question is do do data systems allow you to choose what you want to do not for recovery on the like as the the regular mechanism for for the system to do recovery it'll show up when we do replication you it's actually the next slide right um if I want to make apply changes that I make from one database to another database so if I this node crashes I can just pick pick up where I left on the other Sometimes I could do logical logging, sometimes I could do physical

logging and those you can change what you want to do in post at least other systems less so. All right. So one of the cool things about the redhead log is that we can use it for other things other than recovery. Again basically what I what I just said to them is that we can use it to propagate the changes on our database to other sources that wouldn't be aware of those changes. So one example would be like if I have a you know I have two copies of Postgress and I you know all my rights go to this

one and I want to make sure that any changes on this one gets propagated to the other one. I can just send then the log messages the write ahead log and to that second database system and they can pretend that it's in recovery mode and just replay the log as if it was recovering from a from a crash but it's just replaying the log that's coming over over the network. And this shows up in a lot of times in systems that are doing the you know the the ETL stuff that the DBT guys talked about where I

want to take I I want to run analytical queries or transform my data in a certain way so I can stall it into Snowflake or data bricks whatever my data warehouse I want to want to use and do a bunch of AI uh analytical stuff on that data. The change data capture technique is basically one way to essentially do that. And so you could the the most efficient way to do this is to do the write ahead log uh replication right as I'm writing out the right headlog to disk I can also write it out to the network and then

some other node on the other side knows how to process that data and do something with it. So again like this I have my right head log I apply I I commit a transaction on this node here and I can send it over to this other node here. Now we won't talk about how to make sure that these things are consistent. So if one guy crashes how do we make sure that all our changes made to the other one. That'll be starting next week. We'll talk about how we handle that. But there's a bunch of

tools that know how to interpret the contents of the write ahead log because these things are well documented and then can extract them and do like queries on top of them and transform them in different ways. So the the most expensive one of these is probably Oracle Golden Gate. Um and then the open source tool called Debzium. And you can connect this with like streaming systems like Kafka where you can take the output of a post redhead log through DSium and then convert this in like JSON files or

JSON documents. you can then process on crunch on them and then transform that and then send them off to other systems for for consumption. Okay, we'll talk about a little bit this more about and starting next week but you know when we talk about replication the basic idea is like the right ahead log doesn't have to be on disk. It could actually be a network stream to another system itself and all the all the mechanisms we're talking about here today still work. All right. So now to finish up, the

obvious problem with everything we talked about so far with Redhead logging, you know, you know, it is the preferred choice is that it grows forever, right? My database system has been online for a year. My write ahead log will contain a year's worth of write log messages. And so that's going to suck if now if I crash and come back, I don't want to have to replay an entire year's worth of log in order to recover the database, right? Even I'm doing physiological or physical logging where

the you know reapplying the changes very fast not rerunning the queries as I would in logical logging I still got to crunch through you know a year's worth of log messages and that that's going to be take a long time so the way we're going to this problem is through checkpoints checkpoint is basically a mechanism where we say we're going to write out all the dirty pages that are in our buffer pool we're going to write them out the disk record that as a checkpoint right? Uh or apply that, you know, write write

the flush them out the disk. And then now we're going to record in a log message that we took a checkpoint at this point in time so that when we crash and come back or restart the system and need to examine the log, it sort of bounds how far we have to look back because we would know that there's not going to be changes from uh from transactions that didn't make it out to disk. Right? At that the moment we take the checkpoint, those change those dirty pages have been flushed out. So we don't

have to look at the beginning of the log. We we only have to look back just a little bit uh to to some sort of safe point in time. So I'm going to first talk about how to do this on naive scheme uh called blocking checkpoints and then we'll see the problems of this and then again as I said next class we'll pick up with how to make make this thing actually usable. This is basically what you don't want to do but it it'll solve the problems that we want to have and not having to look

at the entire log but it's going to have other problems. All right. So, the blocking or consistent checkpoint protocol is pretty straightforward. You basically pause all queries from executing right wherever they're at, you stop them. You don't let you don't let any new transactions or any new query start. And then now you're going to flush all the log records that are in your your buffer log in memory. You write that out to disk first. Then you take your all the pages in your buffer pool that are

dirty and flush those out to disk. Then when you then you write a checkpoint entry to the log, flush that out to disk and now unpause and resume all query execution. So let's see what it looks like. So say this is our writ log. We're applying a bunch of changes, right? And then at some later point we're going to crash. You see we have a checkpoint uh entry in here, right? So when we crash and come back, you basically replay the log going from from the the newest record to the oldest record. you go sort of go go back

in time from the bottom to the top. So you start from the bottom, scan up until you find a checkpoint here. And now we know this this is the starting point where we want to make sure we apply all the changes that come after this because anything up above we know has made it out to disk, right? Because those pages have has been have been flushed. So at this point here we know that any transaction that committed before T1 can be just ignored and we don't have to do anything because we know their changes

have been are safely on disk but we're really looking so in case here we ignore T1 but here we would see that we have T2 and T3 exist and you know we could scan up until we to find them but again if we see a commit uh sorry we we scan out and find them if we see a commit from them we know ignore them. In the case here, T2T3, they made some changes after our checkpoint. So, we got to make sure we undo those changes because they they didn't commit before we crashed, right? So, [snorts] we need to redo T2 because

T2 committed after our checkpoint and we need to undo T3 because it didn't commit before we crashed. >> Yes. The question is, do I need in this my toy example here, do I need to scan the whole log because I got there maybe other transactions that made a bunch bunch of changes at the beginning and I didn't see any more things after my checkpoint. Yes, we'll fix that next class. Yes. All right. So, they brought up a good point, but like one is the one is again there may be changes from

transactions that have not committed yet that aren't doing anything. So, I still got to scan the log to find them. So next class we'll see we can source some metadata about how to keep track of what are the actual transactions that are running so that we know we know what we need to go find them right the other problem is that in order to make sure we have a consistent snapshot of the database we have to pause all all the queries and again depending on how big our buffer pool is and how dirty it is we

may have to write out all the page you know write out a lot of pages and that could take a long time. So now your queries are running a checkpoint happens and it blocks all your queries until you flush everything out to disk. So if my buffer pool is like say 100 terabytes again it's not outlandish on high-end systems and all the pages in my my buffer pool are dirty worst case scenario I got to write 100 terabytes before any query can start running again. So that's problematic to the point they said also well I got

to find all the committed transactions which take a long time. And then the other challenge is like how do we decide when should we how often we should we taking these checkpoints. So we have to pause every so often. That's not good. I don't want to take checkpoints too often. But then now my my recovery time is going to take longer because I have longer gaps between my checkpoints. So if we spend all our time just flushing out dirty pages from from the checkpoints, then that's going to slow

down queries. But again, if we don't if we don't do that, then that takes the recovery is going to take longer. So there's no right answer. I can tell you how often you should be taking checkpoints. Even if you do the better ones, the fuzzy ones we'll see next class. It depends on the pain tolerance uh for whatever your application or whatever your company is. So the HFT guys, they don't want things, they want to recover right away. So they'll take checkpoints every five minutes. But for

other systems, that's probably that's probably more than you need. Now it can be based on time or it can be based on um in a lot of systems it's based on how much log records how many log records you how much log record data you've generated. So like in like say like my SQL it might be like if I write 512 megabytes of log data then I take a checkpoint so that way I'm not taking checkpoints at regular intervals. I only do it when I write a bunch of stuff. So my my data system idle I'm running

queries I'm not taking checkpoints un uh neededlessly. So how to do this correctly again depends on what what your tolerance is but every single data system will expose different parameters for these things. So again next class we'll then talk about how we actually make this checkpoint thing for real and handle the case where we can find transactions that were running at the time you took the checkpoint and not have to block anybody while while we do it. The question is, if I'm doing redhead

logging, does that mean I should keep the entire redhead log since the inception of the database? No. Checkpoints will allow you not to have to do that, the correct checkpoints. There may be external factors that require you to do that. So if you're a financial firm, I gotta keep things around for regulatory reasons like for auditing like Sarbain Oxley. So you got you got to keep the redhead long around for seven years, right? Because I need to be able to say what were all the changes I made, right?

Um so the but in most systems you don't you don't need that and I think Postgress cleans clean them up. I think my SQL the old versions didn't clean them up. I think the new versions clean up the log pretty efficiently, right? But in general, yeah, if you don't need it, like the if you take checkpoints enough, you don't need a bunch of I don't need last year's write ahead log. And then when we talk about fuzzy checkpoints, even I have last year's write ahead log, I won't I I won't even

have to go look at it. It's just there taking up space. All right. So again, main take from all this is that right ahead logging is going to be the superior choice. Enable your data system, right? to ensure durable transactions. And the core ideas of Ralog is the the the steel no force policy where steel means we can write out dirty pages before transactions committed. Uh and no force means that we don't require all those dirty pages in memory to be written on disk. But we do require all the log records for that

transaction to be written out to disk. Now the dirty secret is every major data system is going to support what are called synchronous commits to make sure that I I flush things to disk before I say tell you committed. It's not on by default in most systems like in Postgress and in my SQL I don't think it's on by default. So even then like even though righthead logging you know you say your transaction committed there's still like a five millisecond window depending on your group commit

interval where you could still crash and lose data. So if you really care care about performance you uh sorry if you really care about not losing data you make sure that that thing is turned on. All right. So again next class we'll be taking better checkpoints so we don't have to block the system. we don't have to scan the entire log and allows us to do more efficiently and then we'll show how we actually take our logs and take our checkpoints and do recovery for this and the algorithm we're going to we're

going to use is called Aries this was invented by IBM in the 19 paper came out in 1992 and although the techniques like although the I'll describe what the textbook describes as Aries and uh what the original Aries papers talks about most systems are not going to implement exactly as I'm describing here the high level ideas of doing redo or analyze redo and undo is going to be uh very similar. Okay. >> Question. Did IBM shadow agent? Yes. So if you hang around any of the old school

database guys at IBM, you tell them whatever your research is, they'll tell you they invented that in the 80s. So IBM always invented some before, right? But then a lot of they didn't write about, right? At least in this the paper for Aries, it's it's amazing. It's 70 pages. It's because it's hard because like how do you make sure you don't lose data? Like this is that's this is the say this that's the gold standard of how you make sure your database is recover

after crash is using errors. But a lot of they didn't they didn't publish. Okay. Hit it [music] acquaint. [music] [music] Maintain another straight [music] flow with the grain for maintain [music] flow with the grain.

