[music] [music] I'm still associ [music] [music] let's get started. Round of applause for DJ Cash. Thank you again. I would compliment how great of a DJ you are, but there's a lot to cover today. So, we got to jump right into it. So, he's great. This is great. Let's go. All right. Uh again, project four, the recitation. Uh the video is available on um actually I think that 280 is wrong. It's I posted it this morning. Uh but the recitation was last night. Slides are available. The video is available.

Homework five is due this this Sunday coming up. And then again, the final exam will be on December 11th. And there's one more homework after this. Okay. [snorts] All right. So remember last class we were talking about um [snorts] we the first lecture of of how we're going to handle logging and recovery in our database system. And obviously the reason why we need to do this is because if we write some data we tell the outside world your transaction is committed no matter what happens we

don't want to lose that data. So we crash if if the OS crashes the data system crashes the hardware crashes whatever we need to come back and restore those changes. And then recall from last class I said that every recovery protocol you're going to have in a database system is going to have two parts. The [snorts] first part is what we talked about last class was all the things you do during normal operations to ensure that when there's a crash later on that you can recover. So we talked about how we're going to

maintain this write ahead log uh in most systems that we're just going to record all the things that we're doing in all the changes that transactions are making as as they go along. So then now today's class is the second part where we start talking about oop sorry we're start talking about okay after now there's a crash we the system comes back online and we're going to look at all the data we we recorded for ourselves during the normal operation to try to reconstruct the database to be what it was at the

state of the at the moment that it crashed. But of course we can't resume any crash transactions. We need to make sure that we clean all those guys up and roll back any of their changes. So so we don't have any torn rights or partial transactions. So again it's going to look we want to restore the database basically to the state it was at the moment of the crash. Okay. [snorts] So again with write ahead log uh in our buffer pool it is a steal no force policy. Steal means that we're allowed

to evict dirty pages before the transactions that modified those pages uh are committed. And then no force says we're not required to flush all the dirty pages for transactions at the moment that that they commit. Right? And since transactions may abort or fail during normal operations, again, we we make sure we we can roll back those changes and sure that everything's atomic, right? So we're basically trying to deal with the state of the world like that. So say in in we're running some

transactions, all of a sudden there's a crash. The top guy T1 has committed. We make sure we keep its changes. T2 did not commit and aborted. Make sure roll back its changes. And then T3 uh didn't complete before the crash and therefore we make sure it doesn't it none of its changes uh survive after the crash. Okay. So again last class was about okay what are we going to put in the write ahead log uh the undo and redo records so that we can recover after crash. And then we quickly talked about

uh a sort of naive checkpointing scheme at the end of the class so that we don't have to replay the entire log. But we said that had a bunch of problems and that's what we're going to fix today. So now the protocol we're going to learn about today is called ARIES the algorithms for recovery and isolation explaining semantics like it's so important it has its own Wikipedia article about it and this was a this is work developed at IBM research um as part of the DB2 project um so this is

you know building a relational systems not not IMS stuff um and this is basically the gold standard of how you would how you want to implement a transaction actual recovery or sorry a recovery protocol in your database system to ensure that you don't you don't lose any changes. So there was obviously you know this paper came out like '92 uh there people have been doing database recovery protocols for a while. One of the key differences that we'll see in Aries is that it's going to be

overly careful to make sure we don't lose anything. Right? I'd rather do I'd rather make sure I'm super careful and then slowly peel back some of the pieces to make it faster. But I want to make sure I don't lose anything first. And we'll see as we go along there's the the the Aries protocol has it three phases. The the analyze or analysis, the redo and the undo. And what differs from what Aries does from what other data systems were doing prior to this paper is that

sometimes they were doing the redo first and sometimes they were doing the undo first. But this thing is going to be super careful and make sure that you do the redo first by the undo and then once you finish that last phase then you say that now the Davis is fully returned back to the correct state and you can start running transactions uh again. So again, I've said this many times before, I'm going to go through what Aries does, but the the exact implementation from different data systems is going to vary

slightly, but the three-phase piece and the CLR stuff we'll talk about in a second. That's the key the key ideas that everyone should be doing to ensure that that everything's recoverable. The paper is beautiful. It's 70 pages. It's not an easy read. Uh and there's a bunch of things that they're going to cover that we're not going to cover like how do you handle uh different isolation levels for transactions running at the same time. We're going to keep our lives

simple and soon we're running everything in uh restrict uh structure 2PL so we get serializable transactions. All right. So there's three main ideas for Aries. The first one we've already covered is that we're going to maintain a righthead log during normal operations where we record all the changes that transactions make to objects in our database. But we're gonna have to record them to the log first before we apply the changes to the to the actual objects. And then we said last class

that we have to make sure that the log records that correspond to changes that to to objects, those things have to be written to disk before the modified objects or the dirty pages before they're allowed to be written to disk. Right? So we can't write the dirty page and then later on write write the log record because we crash come back. The log record may not made it out. And now we have a page that made a change and we don't know what changed it or how it got changed. [snorts] The next idea that we're going to do is

that we're going to be repeat our history during the redo phase uh upon recovery. So that means that we're going to look at our write ahead log look at all the changes transactions made during the normal operation and we're going to just redo everything. Even if some of those changes actually made it out to disk, we're going to be again super cautious and we're going to say, I'm going to make sure you really got this and we're go ahead and apply those changes. And then the last piece is that when we

start undoing the effects of transaction, undoing operations of transactions, right? Because they got aborted or they they got crashed, they crashed before the system uh so they didn't commit before the system crashed. We're now actually going to maintain additional redhead log records that correspond to the reversal operations that we're going to do as part of the undo step. Basically, you got a log record for anytime you make a change and then if a transaction aborts, you can roll it

back. Now, I'm going to have log records to reverse those changes because I again I want to know exactly what what's happening in in in my my data system on my pages and so I want to record everything that I do. Okay. [snorts] So we'll start off talking about uh the log sequence numbers, how we're going to start keeping track of the order of these operations that that transactions are doing. Uh and then we'll talk about how we do a normal commit and abort during regular runtime. Then we'll build

a or design a better checkpointing algorithm uh called fuzzy checkpoints where we don't have to block all the transactions while we're running in the in the system. Uh and then we'll do our uh we'll put it all together and finish up with Aries. Um, and then we had the Click House guys giving our talk with us today. Uh, and so we'll we'll cut over to that at the end. And if we run out of time, we're not getting full areas. We can pick up on that uh on Monday, next week. Okay. And [snorts] again, during

this discussion, today's lecture, I'm going to be very conservative and very careful about how our recovery scheme is going to be implemented. Uh, and that means we're going to end up writing a bunch of redundant information. But that's okay because again, we don't we don't want to lose anything. uh and there's some optimizations we talk about at the end where you can start again tweaking some of this to maybe not do everything as so uh with so much verbosity as as again the the textbook

as Aries paper describes it but a cap symbol war ignored in the beginning [snorts] all right so the first thing we need to do is extend our redhead log record uh uh the log objects records we had talked about last time start including some additional information and when I showed the log records before I'm you know kind of appending them in sequential order uh and I was only showing like one or two transactions running at a time. But now if you have maybe hundreds or thousands of transactions running at the same

time, you kind of want to know what the true order these operations are apply getting applied, especially if they're happening to different pages at the same time. So now every log record is going to now record and be provided a globally unique monotonically increasing log sequence number. You can think of this a little bit like the time stamp we talked about with transactions uh in OC where every you know the transactions are assigned these globally unique time stamps. Every log record can be assigned

a globally unique log sequence sequence number and this is going to represent the physical order in which the changes are applied to pages. The logical order is the time stamp stuff up above. So we're still running two-phase locking or OC or whatever you want up above in in the rest of the system. But now when I actually write log records to disk, this log sequence number is going to correspond the physical order in which those things actually occur. And now other parts of the system need to need need to be aware of these log

sequence numbers because it's going to determine when they're allowed to do certain things with with pages. So again, we'll have the log sequence number just that gets increase every time we make a new record. But now in every page in our database, whether it's an index page or a table page, doesn't matter what it is, it's going to have this page lsn record that's going to keep track of the most recent log record that modified the contents of that page. Right? So again, every thing in the

header, every data page, now we're going to have this page LSM, and some of them are going to point to log records that are on disk. some of them going to put into log records that are still in memory in in our log buffer. [snorts] And then now there's a global LSN called the flush LSN. The data system keeps track of what's the uh what is the the largest log sequence number for a log record that's been flushed to disk. Right? So it's basically the dividing point the demarcation line and where

where disk the disk buffer stops and where the the the inmemory buffer continues. And so again, as I said before, now we talked about how like we need to make sure that the log record for a for that modified a page and made it dirty that make sure that that gets written to disk before we uh we can write the dirty page to disk. These LSN are how we're going to be able to do this now. So now in your buffer pool manager, in your eviction uh in your eviction algorithm, it has to be aware of what's my flush

LSN. And now as you start examining pages to determine whether they can be evicted or not, you go look at the page LSN in the header and you see whether it's less than or equal to the flush LSN. If it is, then you know that the log record for that that modified that page last is out on disk. If it's if the page LSN is greater than this, then you know there's some log record hanging out in DRAM and therefore you can't flush that page. So now you do a bunch of things like all right well I want I really want to my

eviction policy says I really want to flush this page but my log record for it is still in memory. So you could have your buffer pool then decide, oh go flush the log buffer, right? Doing that whatever the group commit stuff. Make that happen earlier than than it normally would. And then when that comes back with an acknowledgement, then you can go flush you can flush out the page and vict. [snorts] So these LSN are going to show up in a bunch of different places. We talked about the page LSN and the flush LSN,

right? Flush LSN hangs out in memory, tells you the last LSN of the log log record on disk. page LSN is the the the latest LSN that last modified a page. But every single page, we're also going to keep track of the a wreck LSN, which is going to be the oldest update that that that modified this page since that that page was last flushed to disk. And you don't actually have to store this in the the page itself. We're going to store have some two separate data structures we'll cover in a second

called the dirty page table and the active transaction table. So rather in the ra unlike the page lsn where you in the header of the page you put the you put the l the the lsn that modified it last the wreck lsn just hangs out in memory and it's going to correspond to the lsn that last modified the first modified the page since it was last flushed written to disk. [snorts] The last lsn is for for every transaction is keep track of the the latest uh the most recent log record for any transaction that's actually running

in our system. Right? Right? So if it aborts, we know how to jump to the last LSN and start working our way backwards, undo its changes. And then a special one called the master record will be a another global LSN that's going to keep track of the beginning point of the last checkpoint that successfully completed in our write a log. Remember we said we take when we take a checkpoint, we have to write a log record says I'm taking a checkpoint. So the the master record to keep track of when that last checkpoint

that completed successfully when that started where to go find that in the log. All right. So now we go back to our our example we had before. We have we have now a red head log hangs out in memory. We have a buffer. We're bringing in pages. And then now we see that in our redhead log we're including these lsns, right? That is monotonically increasing by one every time we get a new log record. And then we have now in our pages uh for for you know for data pages we have a page LSN right and they can be

different from inmemory versus on disk right so whenever gets written out then the obviously the own disc one gets gets updated then you have this flush LSN that's just going to correspond to what's the last LSN that made it out to disk and that may exist in in your in your buffer pool in memory or not sorry in may in the the the log buffer that's in memory may it may still be in there But I don't care about that. I just care about like, you know, I'm pointing basically the the

last entry I have on my log on disk. I have my master record that's going to hang out in disk too. Again, that's just going to point to the the the starting point of the last checkpoint that I took because I'm going to use that as a way to jump into the log and figure out what was going on at the time at the crash. So, if my page lsn points to something that's on disk, can I flush it? Say, say I I need to modify I modify this page. I want I want to write out the disk. My page Alison points to

something on the log. Can I flush it? Yes, because I know the log record that corresponds to that change made out the disk, right? So, it's safe safe to flush this. But now, if my page lsn points to something that's still in memory, right? And I know that that LSN is greater than my flush LSN, then I know it's not safe to flush this because the log record for it hasn't made it out. So the these LSN are simple simple watermarks for us to determine what's on disk, what's in

memory for both pages and for for log records, right? So I've already said this, right? Every log record has an LSN and then every time we we we're going to modify a page, we're going to create the log record, get an LSN that corresponds to the change we're making to the page. Then now in when we go modify the page we also go update the page ln that sits in the header and we have that we have the right latch on the page. So we can go ahead and do that. Then every single time we we flush out the right head log

e in that group commit process or you know when the log buffer gets full then we update the flush lsn determine what where the the end point is for the log on disk. All right. All right. So, no during normal execution, it's basically all the stuff that I I just talked about, right? Like transaction makes changes and we want to record those changes in our in in our write ahead log before we go apply the changes to uh the pages themselves. So to simplify our discussion today, the assumptions we're

going to make is that we're going to assume that all our log records fit in a single page, right? Yes, you can have you can have you can have tupils that are larger than a single page like you know four kilobytes, eight kilobytes, but then you know obviously what do you do if the log record expands that you know you just have a a sequence number within the the the page or segment number. So I would say my log record is my log record is too big to sit sit in a single page then I would have sort of

the first half log record say I'm segment number one one of two and then the next log record say I'm segment two of two. you would know if you only had the first one, not the second one. You don't have the full log record. And obviously, you don't update anything to say things successfully flush it till both of those segments make it out. But we can ignore that for now. We assume that all our disc rights are going to be, you know, 4 kilobyte atomic rights, right? If things are spam multiple

pages, you know, it just just wait for the extra flush to make sure everything's made it out before you tell the outside where you've committed. We're going to assume that the day system is going to be single version running strong strict 2PL. So that means that we won't worry about weird interleings of transactions upon replay and and because we're using redhead log, we have to use steel no force. We assume we're going to do physical log scheme, physical loging or physiological

logging. We're not going to do the logical logging where you just have the SQL query in the log record where basically have the diff of the changes we're making to pages. And then I'm not going to talk about how you update the pages for indexes part of these changes. It works the same way as you would for regular table pages. But to keep it simple, we're just updating single objects and we'll do physical physical logging. [snorts] All right. So when a transaction goes commit, the data system again going to

write the commit message to the log buffer uh in memory and then it can can then flush that log buffer out to disk either right away or part of the group commit with you know waiting a little bit to get batched together. And then once we know that the commit is successful, we can tell the outside world that your transaction has successfully committed. But then now we're also going to introduce a new log record called transaction end that we can append to our inmemory log buffer. And this is

being used to represent to the system to keep track of the fact that this transaction has successfully committed and there's nothing else we ever need to do for it ever again. So it's in this case here since the transaction is normally committing. I commit and then then I can put the transaction end message once I know things are successfully flushed and I don't need to maintain any additional metadata for it uh about it later on. This will make more sense when we do recovery and we see in this case

why why we need this transaction end for abort when we do aborts but for commit it's pretty pretty straightforward and this transaction end message does not need to be flushed immediately. We can put that in a log buffer and then eventually it'll get written out and that's fine. There's no problems. So it looks like this, right? So again, we have our transaction begin. That's fine. We put a log buffer there. Then this transaction does a bunch of updates. We update we update uh we

[clears throat] go ahead and create the log records. We update the pages in memory. Then upon commit, we got to make sure we flush this out to disk, right? That's fine. Once that's been updated, uh we can update the flush LSN to now point to uh this latest log record here. We can tell the outside world that our transaction has committed, right? That's all fine. And then at some later point soon after this, we'll say, "All right, we don't need this transaction anymore. We'll put a transaction end message in

it in in the log." And then that'll eventually get written out. One additional option you can do, you can say, well, I keep track of my flushed LSN, so I know that at some point I don't need to keep this log buffer around. And so again, I can just do the the swapping mechanism if I have two buffers or three buffers. But I essentially I'm just trimming out what I have in memory because I know I don't need to access these log anymore. Okay. [snorts] All right. So this is pretty

straightforward. The aborts one is where we have to add additional things. So now when a transaction aborts it's basically going to be a like an undo operation during like dur normal execution when we abort it's going to basically be doing the same steps that we would do during recovery. Just now we're just doing this part of the the regular uh execution process. So, we need to add one additional field to our log records called the previous LSM. And we don't need this for correctness reasons. We're going to need

this for for performance reasons. It's going to allow us to basically maintain a link list of the log records that correspond to a single transaction. So, I can jump to the the the last log record for a transaction and then follow this previous LSN to to jump to the different log records for that transaction, right? And in corresponding order. Again, for PowerPoint, I'm only showing like one or two transactions at a time. Think of like a thousand transactions a second. I want to quickly navigate and

get all the log records I need for for a for a transaction. Another thing to point out too is that the the while we're doing this, while transactions are running and then we end up boarding, need to roll them back, we're still technically doing all the concurren concurrent rual stuff we talked about before. So, if I'm doing 2PL, I don't lease the locks soon as the transaction tells me I abort because I still need to go modify the records I've already modified when I thought I was

going to still commit. So, I hold the locks and all those things I'm going to reverse back on. And only when I go ahead and actually finish the roll back, finish finish the undo process, then I go ahead and release the locks. This ensures that like someone else doesn't write to something and I try to roll back my change or try to put it back to the value it was before I started running and I end up blowing away you know that other transactions right all the same stuff we talked about before with 2PL [snorts]

all right so coming back here now now we have again in our head of our log records we have the lsn that's always going up in time and the previous lsn just corresponds to the the the previous one in the case of the top one where we're beginning transaction four there isn't a previous lsn for the begin message. So it's just null or nil. [snorts] So transaction is run makes these changes then it goes ahead and gets an abort and again this could occur because either the the application said abort

this transaction or our contio protocol said abort this transaction we don't know we don't care and now the question is what do we do in this middle step here before we can put that transaction end message for for T4 what do we need to do to roll back those changes What's that? >> Following class. But like and do what? [clears throat] >> I heard heard somebody said it. Yes. >> Process. >> Process the undo. Yes. But we're talking about the logging here. We got to record

what we do. So undo is going to be the same thing as as normal operation. We want to record what we're undoing so that if we crash when we try to undo this, we can we know what we undid and we can make sure we still undo it. And so we're in a new log record type called compensation log records or CLRs. And it's basically it's the same thing as as the update operation we do nor normal execution, but it's just it's just the reversal of it, right? We're just taking the before and after value

and just swapping it over, right? And then when we do this for normal execution, when we're undoing transactions, we don't have to wait until those un these CL CLRs that reverse the changes, they don't need to be flushed to disk immediately when the transaction when when we complete the undo process because actually soon as the transaction says it gets aborted, like either because they say abort or we tell it's going to abort, we immediately come back to the application say your

transaction has been aborted. We don't need to wait to flush anything. Right? Because we're not making any guarantees other than make sure that we reverse all these changes which which we'll do. [snorts] >> The question is if the machine crashes before the roll back completes, what do we do? Roll it back. We'll get there in a second. That's that's the last step of Aries. [snorts] All right. We're running out of space on PowerPoint. So now I'm going to put this

in tabular form. Right? So now we have think of like every row in this table corresponds to a log record. They have an LSN, a previous LSN, transaction ID that that of the of the transaction making the change, the log record type, what object they're modifying, the before and after value, and this undo next LSN thing if if we need to roll things back. [snorts] So this is the same setup we had before. T1 made some changes. Now it aborts. So soon as we get the abort message, we tell the outside world the transaction

is finished. It's aborted. But then now we got to start undoing the changes. So this is why having the previous LSN for transactions makes this easier because I see the abort message. I know the previous LSN for this transaction was 003. So I can quickly jump up to find that log record and and roll it back. So I see the update message at LSN3. So I'm going to create a CLR for this that says I'm going to reverse the change that that happened up above in this previous LSN. So, I'm going to have the same object

that I modified, but then I have now basically the reverse of the before and after value. So, I can swap it back to what it should have been before the transaction made any changes. And then my undo next LSN again is just a a helper to say here's the next LSN that I need you need to roll back uh after this one. So then jump up jump up there and then I'll do the same thing create another LSN or CLR for it uh that's going to corresponds to this change here and I'm just reversing the

values back. Then I get the undo next LSN. I see that it's the begin message and at this point I know I'm done. I reversed all the changes I needed for this transaction. So now this is where I put the transaction end message for the suborded transaction. So for committed transactions there there's nothing in between commit and end. In aborted transactions it's all the CLRs making sure that you reverse all the changes that it made during during normal operations before it aborted.

>> Yes. >> The question the question is for committed transactions can I immediately write the transaction end after the commit? Yes. Durome operation? Yes. Recovery maybe stick. We'll see in a second. You may it has to stick around maybe a little longer. [snorts] Any other questions? All right. Good. So far so good. All right. So, so far this is pretty straightforward. And so the abort algorithm is basically I said before we first write the abort message in the write ahead log. We can tell the outside

world that transactions have been aborted at that point. Um and then we're going to analyze the transactions operations updates made in reverse order and apply them uh apply the reversal and them going back in time. So take the the latest log record that they they they they established to do an update reverse that and then do the next one until I hit the begin and then I know I'm done and I can write the transaction end message. At that point I can release all the locks for my transaction because

I've updated all the records that I wanted to update and then I'm done. Again, a simple optimization you could do in this case here. Um, it's, you know, this is example where in two-phase locking, you could start releasing locks early. If you know that you're never going to update the same object again multiple times to undo changes during the undo process, you can release the lock for that object at the moment you get, you know, as you apply the update, right? But, but you have to

you have to if you scan all the redhead login and know all the objects you're going to modify ahead of time, you can do that. If you don't do that, then then you can't because you don't know whether it's going to you have to do multiple undos. The other thing to point out too is like we never gonna we're never going to undo a CLR. We're never going to undo an undo. Doesn't make any sense, right? Because again, we're trying to undo something that happened to our

execution. So, we don't need to make CLRs for our CLRs when we do uh when we do recovery, right? Once it's there, we know that we can always replay it. Re reapply it over and over again. >> Say it again. >> Question. Why do we need the before and after value for the CLRs? Again, we're being overpantic here, right? Like you could say, I know, going back here, you could you could just say I know I need to reverse this change here. go look at it and say it was it was 3040. I don't need to

record that it was 4030. But again, just be we're being overly >> verbose. [snorts] >> All right. So he's he's basically saying, can I start caching things? Let's not do any that's a do any optimizations. Let's make sure it's correct first. In databases, you want to make sure it's correct first, then you then you make it faster. But yes that you could start doing things like that. Yes. So in terms of achieving correctness, I'm going to wrap [snorts]

my mind around why do we need this whole CLR project at all like if we didn't have the workflow didn't have isn't it true that like we just leave the head as like there will never be a commit entry then we know that the >> so so the statement is uh why do I need why do I need to maintain the CLRs? Shouldn't it be enough for me to go just look at what the changes with what the changes that were made up in regular update transaction or update records and just reverse them? >> Like like aborting and crashing is the

same >> statement is aborting and crashing is the same thing. Yeah. Later on we'll see this is like the key idea but we're going to do this is that there's not going to be any log records that say has this page been flushed to disk. So we don't know when we come back and crash which of these changes actually made it out to disk yet. >> Sometimes we can, sometimes we don't. >> Yeah. But are we supposed [snorts] to be able to look at the previous transaction for let's say a like in any case isn't

it true that we need to be able to look at what we put in a like yesterday and that >> statement is isn't true that I need to be able to look at a log record from yesterday and know what went into it so I can then reverse it. >> Yes. But to to do that correctly I got to reverse all the changes. The checkpoints are basically trying to freeze the state of the of the the buffer pool, write all these dirty pages. But then the problem is the way I'm going to do checkpoints is that I'm

not going to stop everybody from updating things while I'm doing it. So I so it's be this weird I could be in this weird state where some dirty page has been written to disk and some pages haven't been. Uh and I've been modifying things while the checkpoint is occurring. So I don't know what exactly the state of the world is. At the moment I got a checkpoint. So all these undos and these CLRs and the regular record allows me to reverse things back to the correct state [snorts]

there. Are there some optimizations you could do? Yes. Uh but again for recovery stuff you want to be super super careful. >> So this I I said in the beginning this is overly ver verbose but let's let's start with this. So Postgress is even more verbose than this. Postgress we're getting ourselves. Postgress will be after the first after you take a checkpoint the first time a transaction modifies a page they write the whole page out to the write ahead log then write the log record that

modified that page because again you you want to be super careful that like if things get corrupted you you can always come back and get get back to the correct state. So we're getting extra redundancy through these CLRs but it's also going to make sure that like if we crash during recovery we know we what we actually made what we actually modified. So like you two guys every every year people are said why are we doing this? It seems so so wasteful. You're correct but like for to be super careful we're

going to do all of this and there's optimization you obviously can do afterwards. Okay. [snorts] All right. So I think we've we covered all this. All right. So at this point now we can get to start to understand why we have all these CLRs and additional things. So now we're talking about how we're going to do fuzzy checkpoints. the again the the as a reminder the reason why we had to do new checkpoints is that the log's going to grow forever assuming you have transactions running all the

time and when I crash and come back I don't want have to replay five years worth of log the to put my data back in the correct state I want to be able to to sort of go back to a certain like go back a little bit in my right ahead log and use that as a starting point for me to say let me reconstruct the state of the database at that point in time rather than the beginning of time so this be a mechanis doesn't allow us allow us to sort of speed up the the um the recovery time. So the last class we talked about a

simple protocol where we basically stop the world when we want to take a checkpoint like stop queries from running, queries from modifying things, stop any new queries from starting any any new transactions, wait until all any actual transactions that are still running could finish execution, right? which could, you know, could take days or hours and that that that sucks. But then once we know there's no active transactions, then we take whatever's in our buffer pool, write that out to disk,

and we know that's been flushed, and then we add a a we can add a a checkpoint entry into our log. So now if we crash, come back, we go look at that checkpoint record, we know that all there's no inflight transactions at that moment at the checkpoint and the database is a consistent snapshot, [snorts] right? So it makes recovery super easy because again I don't have to look at the log and look for transactions that might have been running while I took the checkpoint. I waited it till they all

finished and then I don't have any weird torn right situations. So recovery is easy but obviously this is super slow because you have to pause everything while you take a checkpoint. So a slightly better one is not wait for transactions to finish but you just pause them from executing whatever they were executing right and then you write out your dirty pages. Uh and then once that's done then then you can allow transactions start running again right but this this has problems too. So say I have three pages

in my database uh I my buffer pool I have one one worker thread wants to do checkpoints one worker thread is running transactions. So say the transaction it's going to modify two pages it's going to modify page one and three. So it first modifies page three. Then the checkpoint starts and the checkpoint's going to pause any transaction that that's that's running from any running anything else, right? It could be either your inflight query or just preventing them from running another query. Then

now the checkpoint is going to basically do a special scan on all my pages in my buffer pool and write those out to disk. Right? So I have page one, page two, and then the modified page three that transaction modified. Then the checkpoint completes, the transaction wakes up again, and now it modifies page one. But I don't have a consistent snapshot of of those pages in my buffer. I'll have I'll I'll have half the changes that transaction one made. So I still have to go look around more

in the write log to figure out what was this transaction doing at the time I was taking the checkpoint. So I make sure that I got I can try to reconstruct the database and get that make sure I get that page one of there because the transaction may let may later commit and we tell the outside where the transactions committed but I'm missing that up its update in the page. So what we're going to start doing now is now we're going to add additional metadata to our write ahead log to keep

track of when we take the checkpoints when the checkpoint's going to start and when when it's going to finish. And then we're going to record what were the transactions that were running at the moment that the checkpoint started and what pages were dirty in in our buffer pool at the moment the checkpoint started. So that's le is going to give us more idea about what's going on in the state of the system at the moment that we we started taking a checklist. We'll know whether these

changes actually made it out to disk or not. [snorts] So the AT or transaction table is pretty straightforward. Every transaction that exists will have a transaction ID, right? Similar to the active transaction table we talked about when we try to do OCC or MPCC. We need to keep track of what transactions are running this running at the same time. So it's it's basically the same table. Then we'll have the status of the transactions mode, what what phase it's in, right? It can either be running because it's still

actively going going on. Uh it's in committing process. Uh and then candidate for undo means that we think we're going to have to undo this. It may change later on that it turns out this transaction does commit and we can change its status. But when we do recovery, we assume everyone's going to get rolled back until we we learn otherwise. [snorts] So we can remove a transaction from the AT once we see it transaction end message, right? Either because it got committed or boarded and rolled back

because at that point we know that there isn't going to be any more changes coming from this transaction and we don't need to maintain additional state for it. So when we do this recovery process, we're again we're going to look at the uh we can look at the actual transaction table and and say well these transactions are running at the time I took the checkpoint but I I don't know yet whether they're going to commit or not. So I'm going assume everyone's going to abort and then later on as I

scan the log I might find a commit message and I go ahead and change it status. [snorts] The dirty page table is going to be another separate data structure where we're going to cord all the pages that were in our buffer pool that were marked dirty uh that were not flushed to disk yet at the moment that the checkpoint started. And this is where we're going to record the ls the wreck lsn to say here's the newest log record sorry here's the oldest log record that modified this p this page and made it dirty since the

last time that page was written out to disk. So page LSN is the newest log record that modified the page and rec LSN is the oldest log record that since the page was brought into memory or since it was last written in a disk. Right? [snorts] So this dirty page table is going to keep track of all the pages that are buffable at the moment the checkpoint started that that were that are dirty. All right. So now in this case here we we have our checkpoint starts. Uh and in this case here we have the the when a

checkpoint starts we keep track of the the AT. So we we know that there's a transaction T2 uh that's still running. T1 got transaction end before the checkpoint started. So it's not in our in our active transaction table. And then there's this uh there's a log record up above that corresponds to modification on page 22 from transaction T2. And that was that was that's hanging in our buff pool that's still dirty. Then later on we take another checkpoint, right? And now we have

transaction T2 and T3, right? Because T2 committed before our checkpoint started, but we haven't seen a transaction end message yet. So it's still technically alive. Um, and then T3 started after the last checkpoint. So that that goes in our actual transaction table. And then we have in our dirty page table, we have the two modifications here uh from the you know from from T2 and T3. >> [snorts] >> P1P. >> The question is why isn't P11 in the DPT? It got written out to disk, right?

There's no log record said page got written out of disk. The only information we have is is whether it shows up in the dirty page table. So, this is better because now we at least have some additional metadata about what's going on in our system uh at the moment of the crash. But we're still taking blocking checkpoints. So every you know every time I'm taking a checkpoint here and the two log records here I'm stopping every all the transactions from running take a checkpoint and at least now I I know

that if a if a transaction modified a uh pages I would at least keep track of like was it dirty before or after I took the checkpoint yes or no but I'm still blocking all my transactions. So what everyone does instead is what are called fuzzy checkpoints. And this is now where it's it's fuzzy because it's it's allowed to write out pages that uh that you want to write all the pages that were dirty since the the moment the checkpoint starts. But those dirty pages might contain changes that from log

records that came in after the checkpoint started. And there may be changes that occur to pages that I don't write out my checkpoint because they were modified after the checkpoint started as well. But I just I missed it. Right. But the the DBT and ATT is going to give me enough metadata to go look in the log around, snoop around and figure out what was actually going on to figure out, you know, find out the things that I I may have missed. So now instead of just having a single checkpoint, you know, record in my log

that says here's the checkpoint started and and I block everyone. Now I'm going to have a begin and end. And that's going to correspond to the point in time, right? denoted by the log sequence numbers because that's basically representing physical time of when the checkpoint was occurring. And I'm going to record the the the what the dbt and the AT were at the moment the checkpoint started. But I end up writing it out to the commit end message checkpoint end message as a way as to to simplify

things so I can I can find things more easily later on. [snorts] All right. So in this case here, assume now we're going to that transaction uh Davis is going to flush page P11 before the checkpoint starts here, right? So then now when I when the checkpoint finishes, I'll have the AT from when I started. So transaction T2 uh was running when the checkpoint started at 007. T1 got a transaction end at 006. So it's not an actual transaction table. And then there's my my dirty page table

that begin up there. My dirty page table corresponds to this update here that got occurred that was dirty before I took the the the checkpoint and then I may have uh written it out with that change or may have a change from another transaction that made a change before the checkpoint ended or uh or I made it written out and then someone updated and that that page is that that update's still in memory too. So sort of three states that a page could be in. [snorts] And then now once the the the checkpoint

completes and I flush the checkpoint end message I then update the master record for the database and say here's the LSN of the last checkpoint that I took. So in the case here 010 when I complete that checkpoint I write my master record 007 because that's the checkpoint began up above. Then when this checkpoint ends down here at 0115, I write my master record that the checkpoint start at last successful checkpoint was 013. And then when I crash, come back when I see you in a second. We're going to use

that to jump to this this uh checkpoint begin. All right. So now Aries with with our with our fuzzy checkpoints and these in these CLRs and the log records, we now get new recovery. So going to be three phases. The first phase we're going do and we're going to analyze the the the redhead log starting at where the master record points to. So the la the beginning of the last successful checkpoint and we're going to scan forward in time to the end of the log on disk and look at all the the log

records we see and try to figure out what what transactions are going to survive, what transactions need to get rolled back and try to and what pages may have may or may not have been written to disk assess during this process. Then after the anal an analysis phase, then we do redo where now we're going to jump back to another point in the log where we determine here's the starting point of an active transaction or transaction that was active when a checkpoint started. And we're going to

scan through and make sure we redo all its changes. And then now we go back and undo all the changes transactions that should have not be should not survive after the crash and go ahead and reverse them. So we're essentially taking three passes over the log, but in every pass we may be jumping farther and farther back in the log based on the information we collect during the the analysis and redo process. Another way to look at that visually again we say this in our right log and we crash here at down below. So when I

come back in the analysis phase, I'm going to use the master record to figure out what's the starting point of the last checkpoint. And so I'll scan from that point down and look at what all the what all the transactions are doing after after that checkpoint started. Then now based on my AT it's going to determine here's the transactions that that I know about in my log and I need to make sure I redo all their changes. Even if they're going to get aborted later on, I'm still going to redo them.

So in this case here, I go look at the and I go look at my log in the redo phase. I find the smallest wreck LSN in my dirty page table after analysis. So, this is going to be what's the what's the the earliest LSN that corresponds to a log record that modified a page that was not that that was dirty before I started my checkpoint. So, I want to I'm going to go back and make sure I reapply all is changes from here down below. And then now in the analysis phase, I'm going to jump to the oldest log record

of any active transaction that that that was still alive at the moment that I crashed. Jump back to that point in time and then scan through and undo all those transactions that should be aborted and rolled back. And during this redo process, we end up we may end up uh so I go like this. uh we may end up reapplying uh the the the the CLR records to make sure we we reverse things, but that's okay because that's again that's going to put us back to the correct state we want to be in. All right, so analysis phase as I've

already said you can scan for from the beginning of the last successor checkpoint to the end of log. you're basically reconstructing the the AT uh going forward in time. If you as you're scanning along in the analysis phase, if you find a transaction end message, you know that there's not going to be anything else from that transaction. So, you can go ahead and remove it from the AT because it's successfully committed for all other log records. Uh if the transaction is not in the AT, then you

go ahead and add it. But you said it's undo status or it's its execution status to be candidate for undo because again you're scanning forward in time. So you you you haven't seen a commit or abort message for the transaction. So you just assume that it's going to abort. But then when you see the commit message for a transaction, then you update its status in in the AT to say it's it's it's allowed to commit. [snorts] As we go scan along too, we also want to populate the the DBT. So if

we find a page that's not uh that's being referenced that's not in our DPT as we scan along then we know it's been modified since our last checkpoint and therefore we want to make sure that it exists in there and we just set its recn uh to be whatever the LSN that that modified it because we know it didn't exist in the buffer pool at least in a modified form if uh at you know at the moment that we see the log message because otherwise we would have seen it in the DPT. So now at the end of the analysis phase,

the AT is going to tell us what are all the transactions that were active at the time of the crash and therefore we need to roll them back. And the DPT is going to tell us all the pages that might have been that were modified but may not have been written out to disk. And you don't know whether they've been mod whether the change got written out to disk unless you go read them. So the DPT is telling you what you got to go check. Let's look example like this. So say that our transaction uh sorry system begins a

checkpoint at 0 1 0. So at this point here we don't we don't have anything in our AT or DBT uh at least initially but we know that all all the transactions that are running in our system and all the uh all the log records sorry all the the pages that are sitting in our buffer pool but as at this point here we don't record that in the begin message. Then later on at at 020, we see this transaction uh t96 is making an update to a to an object a in page 33. And again, assuming that if this thing

got was in our in our log message, then you know it modified the page, but we don't know whether that page was flushed out to disk as part of the checkpoint like the checkpoint got to it first or we modified it after the the checkpoint read out that page. So, we put a log record in that says here's here's or an entry in our AT says here's this transaction T96 that we now know about, right? Because we didn't we didn't see the begin for before the checkpoint started. So, that the the begin message

for this transaction is up above before the checkpoint began. But since that we don't know what's going to happen to it at this point as we in our analysis, we think it's going to we we assume it's going to get rolled back and aborted. So, it's undo candidate. And we keep track of the page that it modified during this, right? Okay. And the recent corresponds to the one that modified it. Then now we get to our transaction end. And at this point here, now we have in our AT. We have a T96 T97. So there's

another transaction T97 up above that did a bunch of other stuff before transaction began. And we haven't seen it yet in any log messages after the transaction at the checkpoint started. So we now know about it. And I'm going to assume that's going to abort. And we also know about there's there was uh was a page 20 that was dirty in our buffer pool that the checkpoint would have at least uh we know it would would have been written out if the checkpoint completed. Then we see the log record that for T96

that committed. So we update its status in the AT that's allowed to commit. And then we now see the transaction end message for T96. So we can go ahead and go ahead and remove it. So, at this point at the end, we know that there's a transaction T97 that did something up above that we're going to need to roll back, but we don't have the log. We don't have the log records for it. So, we have to go find those. And we know that there's page 33 and page 20 where they there was changes made to

them that may have not made it out to disk. Yes. >> The question is why does not why does the TPT not have P33 at at 030? Yeah, >> because it it was not dirty at the moment the checkpoint started. So the DBT at record what was the state of the of of the world at the time the checkpoint started. >> I see >> and they put they put it in trans they put it in the transaction end part not the beginning. [snorts] All right. So now now after the analysis phase we have we have our ATT or DPT and

now we know what transactions we need to reapply changes to and what transactions are going to get aborted and therefore we need need to start undoing those changes um and sorry and and sorry we don't we're not going to undo anything yet. We're going to apply always the all our changes but if there were a board of transactions and we see the CLRs in the log as we're scanning through we're going to reapply them as well. And then in the second phase, we're going to go back and un

undo stuff. But for now, we're just we're just going to reapply whatever we see in the log. We're not going to create new log log new log entries. We're just add we're just re-executing what we have. [snorts] So, we're going to scan forward from the log uh log at the at the smallest rec LSN in the TBT because that's going to correspond to the log record that modified a page uh that was dirty at the moment the checkpoint started. So we know that's going to be farther back in

time than anything that got modified, you know, while the checkpoint was running. And then anytime we need to reverse or undo a transaction because we know it's what it status should be because we've scanned to the end of the log. We know whether it's going to any transaction to commit or not. So we we have to undo any changes. That's when we go ahead and apply the CLRs. Um I'm getting ahead of myself. That's undo. For redo, as I scan through, if I find a a a log record that updates a

page or a CLR, I need to determine whether I should bring that page back into memory and go apply it. And so now you can start looking about what's in my dirty page table and understanding how these log sequence numbers are going to determine whether I've already applied this change or not based on what I see when I bring the page back in into into memory. So if we see an update record or a CLR that we need need to re reapply. If that page is not in our dirty page table then we know that the change for it for that

particular uh page that p that page when was modified was written out the disk before we crashed and therefore we don't need to bring it back in memory and reapply our change. If it is in our dirty page table, then we need to check to see whether that the the last log record, the rec LSN, the earliest log record that modified that page since it was last flushed to disk. If that comes before the LSN that I'm looking at right now, then I know that whatever my change was, that got applied uh to that to that

log record or that that the log record I'm looking at, that got applied since the page was written out. So I don't need to reapply it. But if the the law of record I'm trying to apply if its LSN is greater than the page LSN then I know that my transaction that that I'm trying to re redo made some change that modified the page and that that record was not those changes were not written out to disk because the page lsn what's the what's the last log record that modified this page when that page was

written to disk. So my recre LSN if my LSN comes later in time I know that this page got modified flush to disk and then I try to update it and my update didn't make actually make it out to disk. The challenge though in order for me to figure that out I got to go out to disk bring that page back in and go check its page LSN because I'm not recording that in my my dirty page table in my checkpoints. I'm only recording the the wreck LSN. only recording the the the oldest log record that modified the page

since it was last since it was last flushed to disk. So for the first two here, you can just check on the dirty page table without actually looking the page and figure out whether you need to reapply this. For the last one, you have to go bring the page in and look at what what the page ln is set to. So to redo any action, we we just reapply the update uh and then set the page LSN to whatever the LSN that we're modifying uh that we we applied. We don't do additional logging and we don't

need to make sure we flush anything during this recovery process because that would be unnecessarily slow, right? We're not running other transactions. We're just trying to redo things. So why bother flushing things and make sure things committed? And then now once we reach the the the end of the read phase any any any transaction that successfully committed or we end up uh so any transaction that successfully committed then we can put the transaction end message but we may still have transactions we need to

reverse their changes on right and that's what we're going to do in the second phase because we have to we this is we're going to generate additional CLRs. All right. So now in the undo phase, this is where we know all the transactions that successfully committed or or did not commit at the time the the the crash occurred. We've gone through the analysis phase. We figured out what every what everything is. We've done the redo where we've reapplied every everybody's changes. And then now we

need to go back and undo the changes for transactions that should not be allowed to commit or don't don't commit. So if any transaction that's still in our AT with this undo status at the end of the redo phase, we now need to go back in reverse order uh and apply the changes as if it was an abort during normal execution operations. Right? And we're going to use this uh the the the last lsn the to undo things allow us to quickly jump back in the right head log jump over things we don't need to

look at again. just jump to the the transaction uh the the the a transaction that we're aborting undoing. We can jump to its log records and quickly find them and and roll them back. And every time we we we're going to reverse a change, undo a change, we're going to create a new CLR. All right, so let's look a full end example here. So we have a transaction starts at checkpoint at at at 010, sorry, 011. Checkpoint ends at 012. There's a T1 at 013. it makes a change to page P5. Uh T2 makes a change to P3.

T1 then calls an abort. So to roll that back again, we have our CLR records for this, right? We go ahead and reverse the changes. Once we know all the changes for T1 are done, uh then we can put the transaction end message in, right? And then PS LSN allows to quickly jump through and find everything we want without having to, you know, look at everything one individually. Then now say T3 does another change, right? T2 now shows up, makes a change. Um, and then we crash. So now we're going to go through the the

three phases. So we're going to come back and use the master record to figure out where the the starting point of the last successful checkpoint was. So that's going to be up here. And then when we now look at the checkpoint end message, assume inside of it that record is going to have the the AT and the the DPT. So that's going to tell us that we know about transaction T1, T2, T3. Uh, and we know since we don't know what's going to happen to them at this point, we assume that it's their status are undue

candidates. And then there's a dirty page P1 that has some modification from a transaction that made a change up above at at LSN 001. So now when I scan through in my uh to from that from the checkpoint end to the end, right, I would see that I saw that there's two more pages that got modified since then and they they may not have made it out to disk. I don't know. And then now T1 I saw a transaction end message for. So I don't need to keep track of it anymore because I know it's

going to successfully uh commit. So then now I have these last lsns for my for for these T2 and T3 here. I'm going to know where I need to start. My starting point is to be able to roll that roll them back. [snorts] So same now I I I do my um I do my redo. I go through and re reapply everything, right? And then now at this point I want to start reversing the two transactions that don't successfully commit. So, I'm going to start with T2 because that's the first one uh that I had the the most recent

log message right before the crash. So, I'm going to put a CLR for to reverse its change. And then my undo next pointer just points to the next thing I have to undo. And then now I know the next thing I need to do is reverse this change at for T3. And again, assuming that this undo next is some begin message for this transaction that's up above us in the log that we're not showing here. At this point here, I know I don't have any more changes I have for T3. So again, if I want to be super cautious,

I'll flush the red ahead log and flush all the new pages to disk. And then that way again, I I'm I'm sureing that all my changes are made out there. But yet, you don't have to do this. And I just update my flush LSN to keep track of that these are the changes that that I made. And the reason why I want to do this, if I crash come back during this recovery process, uh I can look at the the the page LSN and recognize that my change actually made it out the the disc when I reverse this transaction. So therefore I

don't have to reapply the changes later on. But let's say now during recovery I crash again. Worst case scenario. So now when I come back the second time after I do my analysis I'm going to see that the only thing I have sitting around is this T3 that I still need or sorry T2 that I still need need to roll back on. Right? So I'll just add my CLR to reverse its change. See that there's some undo next point of something else. And at this point here, I I know I've there's nothing else for me to reverse

with the T2. So I can go ahead and put my transaction end message in. And then now this point the database is fully recovered. I can tell the outside world that we're accepting new queries and new transactions. >> Yes. >> Question is what if you crash in the middle of abort? Well, we just did that, right? So I'm I'm I'm aborting T2 and T3. T3 gets aborted. I put transaction N. But before I can put the transaction reverse the last change for T2, I crash. >> What do you mean partial CLR?

>> That's this. That's what I'm doing right here. Right. T2. I when I go for it, T2 has still one more thing to abort. Before I get there, I crash. I come back and I I when I scan when I scan everything, I see T2 is still hanging out there. I have to roll it back. But then when I go through and redo, I would reapply the CLR change. Make sure I reverse its change. Then recognize I still have to there's this thing points to undo next uh 014. So when I come back, I need to put a CLR for 014.

So no many times I I keep upboarding and come back I I'm going to redo the changes until I get to the transaction end other questions. All right. Well, we can finish up quickly then. Okay. So what do I do if I crash on recovery in the analysis phase? Nothing, right? you just come back and do the analysis phase over again because that that's a read only operation. If I crash during the redo again, I do nothing. I because all I'm doing is just pendantically reapplying the changes over again. I may be overwriting the

same change over and over again, but that's okay. I'm guaranteed to end up with the same database state. So just if I crash during redo, I just do it all over again. to make things go faster during redo. Again, I assume that my changes are not that I'm not going to crash during the the redo process. So, I don't do those those flushes every single time I see a transaction end. I just eventually get get to them later on. And and this what most systems will do. The original Aries paper was again super careful. They

would flush at almost every every time a transaction ended even though you don't need to. And then to make the undos faster, there is a research paper that basically says you don't apply the changes. it in the undo phase, you just record that there's things you want to undo in pages and it's kind of like the mod log we saw in the case of like the B apps tree or like my SQL compression scheme. You keep a little mod log and says here's the things I need to reverse back on this

page and then upon reading that page or trying to do something that page then I go ahead and apply them. And the idea is there is that rather than waiting for me to do the entire undo process, I just ceue up those changes immediately start executing other transactions that so they can go ahead and read and do whatever they want and eventually one of them bunch of them will touch the pages that have pending undo records I need to apply and only then I go ahead and apply them. And of course, the last one, you can

always rewrite your application. Try to undo try to avoid long running transactions, but that's easier setting it up. All right, so I'm rushing to this end. I can pick up where we left off. Uh I pick up on this again and do a a quick um review next class, but the main things to remember about areas is that we're using steel no force doing fuzzy checkpoints. Allow us to take snapshots of pages while transactions are still running. We can still redo everything starting at the the earliest data page.

We're never going to uh and We make sure that when transactions get aborted, we're going to apply CLRs, make sure we undo all the changes and that no matter what, no matter times we restart, those changes always get correctly reversed. And the log sequence numbers are this way to record the physical ordering of the changes uh as they should be correctly applied. So at this point in the semester, you know how to build now a safe and correct single node database system. Congrats. May not be, you know, the first pass may

not be a good one, but you know how to build one. Next class we'll talk about how do I make it distributed because this is when everything gets much harder. Okay. All right. So let's switch over to the guest speaker. >> Um hi everyone again. Um and thanks for having me on. Uh I'm Robert. I work at Click House and I saw that you had Benjamin from Firebolt speaking here two weeks ago in class. So I guess that makes me the second German to present this semester. And it's actually um

quite interesting. Firebolt started as a fork of uh clickous's open source codebase and as far as I know they are still using the same file format as click house. So we must obviously have done something right with the file format and I thought I could talk a little bit about um data organization and indices in click house and how that powers fast analytics. Uh first of all what is click house actually? So, Clickhouse is an open source column oriented distributed analytics database. The code is open

source since 10 years and um ClickHose is really popular. Um I um took a look and there there are now almost 45,000 on GitHub and on the right you see some uh some of the analytics database in our space. The code is written in C++ and the database runs on pretty much anything from a Raspberry Pi to powerful servers in clusters with hundreds of nodes. Um, Click House is a column store and people typically use it to filter and aggregate billions and trillions of rows. Our storage layers also optimize

for appends which basically means that uh inserts are super fast and updates and deletes do work but they tend to be a bit slower but I say we made a few optimizations for that recently as well. Now um append only workloads that might sound a bit strange but there are actually lots of use cases where the data is continuously inserted but only rarely or never modified. These use cases are typically around events, log files, time series, financial data and so on. Okay. Um this slide shows how click

house stores tables. So you see on the left side a bunch of insert operations and each insert uh basically creates a file on disk. The term that we use internally is part but in the end it's a file plus some metadata. And it might even be uh too obvious here but when you insert the data right you you don't need to synchronize with existing parts or global data structures. You don't need to do index lookups to check uniqueness. the performance of your inserts is only limited by the performance of your disk.

The other thing that's um the other important thing is that the rows in each part are sorted or clustered by the primary key columns of the table. The user defines the primary key columns up front. So keep that in mind for a second. You also see a box labeled buffer on the left side and that's our asynchronous insert mode which basically buffers the rows from multiple inserts before the part is then um flushed to disk. Okay. Now as more data comes in the parts of course start to accumulate. So click

house has a compaction chop that runs in the background and it continuously merges multiple parts into bigger parts and remember the parts are sorted right. This means the compaction chop can use a Kway merge sort algorithm to combine the the parts and that's that's fairly efficient. So you may noticed that all of this is uh quite similar to a classical LSM tree. The difference is that the parts in click house are all equal. So they are not organized in a tree or on a hierarchy. >> This is quite nice for our use case

because of two reasons. uh first the scan can parallelize over all the parts. So there is no implicit chronological ordering between the parts that would somehow restrict concurrency. And the second reason is that the merge is also not bound to certain uh LSM tree levels. Um so it can freely pick any parts uh anywhere to merge. I'll also say that updates and leads become a bit more tricky in this overall design. So, we cannot use tombstones, but that's fine for us since we don't expect to have a lot of updates and

deletes anyways. Okay. Now, um let's zoom into one of these mysterious parts. This slide shows a table with web access statistics. So, you have um a user from a certain region who accesses a certain website, right? And we collect all of this information in a table. So the data in this part consists of only a few seconds but there are nevertheless many thousands of rows here. The user defined the event time column as the primary key for the table. And like I mentioned before, this means that click house sorts the rows in the

part by event time. Um from a database perspective, sorting is really nice, but we'll need an even smaller granularity or data access granularity to make the scans sufficient. So what click house does is that it splits each part further into so-called granules. Um and every krenol has 8,192 rows. You can see that on the left side. So there is quo zero in blue, granle one in pink and so on. Um grano and click house is the smallest unit that our scan operator can load from disk. Now the question is of course how does all of

this help with scans? The key concept is to prune data as aggressively as possible. So you want your select queries to skip most of the data because every bite that you don't read makes your query faster, right? So let's make an example. You see a simple select query with a filter on event time at the bottom of the slide. And this query could in theory do a binary search on the events time column to find the right granules. Now, a binary search will have a logarithmic number of disk accesses.

That sounds nice, but it's still not fast enough, especially when you try to do that on top of object storage, which has latencies of multiples multiple tens of um milliseconds. So, click will do something smarter. it will create a small index structure on top of the primary key columns which contain the first row of each granle and you can see that in the yellow box on the slide. Uh we say that this uh index is a sparse index because it points only to every 8,192 row and not to every row. And this this

index is also tiny compared to the rest of the table. For example, you need only 1,000 entries and then you can index already over 8 million rows. So actually the index is so small that we load it and pin it in memory. So now our select query will do the binary search on the sparse index and that that will find the right grren and then it will load the grrenels from disk and uh finally filter them because they could still contain a mix of matching and non-matching rows. So that's what we call pruning with primary key indices.

There are two more pruning techniques in click house and I'll mention them only briefly. Projections are the second pruning technique. So you can think of a projection as a permutation of a table. It contains exactly the same rows as the original table, but it's sorted by a different primary key. So if your workload has a lot of queries with filters on columns different than the original primary key columns, then you want to create a projection. The cool thing is that the projections in click

house are implemented at the part level. So basically every part can have an arbitrary number of projections and the optimizer will pick the most beneficial one for every query. Projections can help a lot with query performance, but their biggest problem is the storage footprint. So you can easily double or triple the the memory consumption of the table. So what is even more popular with our customers are skipping indices and the idea here is to annotate the granules with small amounts of metadata. The scan

can then check if no rows or if all the rows in in the in a block or in the in the granules match the predicate and it can potentially skip the entire block. Click house has different uh types of skipping indices. For example, minmax indices um the unique block values and bloom filters. Each type has different trade-offs, but generally speaking, skipping indices are a lot more lightweight than projections, but they're also hard to tune because they they make assumptions about the data distribution.

There is a lot more to say about pickals, of course, but I hope I could give you at least an idea how data pruning works in our database. If you have any more questions, feel free to drop me an email and thanks for your attention. All right, >> any quick questions for Robert before letting go? Yes. >> Are there any plans to make joints faster? Because I feel like join primary bottleneck for primary build on trickles. >> Go for it. Yes, >> we're working on it and we implemented

join reordering recently and we are now adding tons more optimizations for joints. Yeah. What the primary bottleneck has stopped you so far change now join >> the question is what's what was the main bottleneck for joins and click house that you guys have been fixing in in recent recent weeks or months. >> Oh no there was no particular bottleneck. It's just, you know, um, historically most of our users, um, use denomormalized tables, right? So everything's one single huge fact table

and then you don't need joints. That's that's that was the only reason. >> Yes. Click house is an amazingly engineered system. It's like I same category as like the the Umbra system or yellow brick like the amount of engineering they've done uh in Click House is is amazing. when when I think Yandex first announced it in 2016, I thought it was fake. I thought it was vaporware because like it didn't ex I never heard about before 2016 or 2015 and then they listed all these features. I was like there's

no way somebody wrote all in a year but like they've been working on it for a long time just publicly came out about that and the again the amount of engineering these guys do to make this work is is phenomenal. It's amazing. So again, thank you, Robert. [music] [music] >> [music] >> over [music] the fortune. Get the fortune fame maintain flow with the grain. Get the fortune [music] maintain flow with the gra. >> [music]

