I'm still associ lost brother or something. got to deal with uh who wants his money or whatever his problem. Um so all right, lot to cover today uh and next class um because we're trying to wrap up the end of the semester. But before we jump into the course material again for you guys in the course uh project 4 be due on September 7th. That link there will take you to the recitation from last week with the slides and all that. Homework six will go out later today. Uh and that'll be due on the same date on December 7th.

Um, and the final exam is December 11th. I'll post the on pata this week. I'll post the final exam study guide along with the practice uh the practice exam. Um, again, please don't make travel plans before this date because we won't be able to reschedule you. And then if you're, as I said last class, we'll be teaching 445 645 again next semester. Um, if you're really if you love the class and can't get enough of it, please sign up to be a TA TA. If you hate bustop and think it's the worst code

you've ever seen in your life, uh then also sign up for a TA because we want your opinion on how to fix things. Okay, any questions about any of these? Yes. >> Uh the question is how many cheat how many pages for the cheat sheet for the final exam? It' be the same as the midterm. The final exam will cover basically from the midterm until next class next. It's it's these questions it's cumulative not in the sense of like am I going to ask you uh like specific questions of like buffer pool stuff that

we covered during the midterm but like you got to know what SQL is you got to know what relational algebra is because you you know you like that's the background you need to understand all these other things but the emphasis will be on things that came after the midterm other questions and then it's it's a three-hour the slot is three hours but it'll be the same uh it'd be roughly the same length as it would have been on the midterm that so that you can complete it in an hour and

20 minutes. But if you want to take the full three hours, go for it. Okay. All right. Database talks we have coming up. Uh today after class we have uh a guy in the UK building a system called XTDB. Uh this is a time series database system. uh we haven't really talked about time series too much but it's basically think of like you you keeping track of time as a first class concept on on tupils inside your database system and I think what's cool that they can do is they can do multi-dimensional time uh

so he'll cover that then uh a week from now we'll have the guys from Snowflake building this thing called Apache Polaris it's the catalog it's a open source reimplementation of the Apache iceberg catalog again the background was snowflake tried to iceberg for $600 million. Data bricks caught wind of that and came in and blew them out and paying for a billion dollars for the iceberg team. It was a company had 40 people had some revenue but not you know $1 billion worth of revenue. Uh and they got bought

by data bricks and then so snowflake made their own open source version called Polaris. But again it's not to say snowflake is not is incompatible with iceberg just they didn't they weren't able to buy the iceberg people. And then we've had an addendum to the schedule for the seminar series this semester. Uh there's an Apache project called Flu. Uh I actually don't know what this does. Uh but they sent me a lot of emails begging to give a talk. So we'll we'll figure out what they're

going to do. Um I've never heard of it prior to them reaching out to me and that I've never run across anybody using it. Okay. All right. And that'll be the flu talk will be the last talk uh for the semester and then we'll kick off the se seminar series uh in in the spring. Again, even if you graduate and leave, you know, leaving CMU, if you still want to be involved and watch these videos on Zoom, please join us. A lot of my former students show up on these things. All right, so here here's where we're at

for the semester. What we've accomplished so far. As I said at the end of last class, we now know how to build a single node database system, right? You know how to make it transactional, how to make it uh, you know, fault tolerant. We know how to run queries on it, do some query planning for the the SQL queries that show up. And so now this class and next class is to now discuss at a high level what distributed database systems look like. And again the the databases themselves are are are hard to understand and and

build correctly. Uh and distributed databases just make this all even harder. So that's why we do single node stuff first get the fundamentals down and then we can understand uh how to make things distributed. Right? And the it's the basic the same architecture we've been talking about just now it's split across uh mult two or more nodes. And the questions we're going to talk about today and next class is how we're actually going to be communicating across these nodes. whether we're going

from the top down or we're coming from the bottom up or actually something more in the middle uh where we're coordinating across like the buffer pools for example, right? So all the things that we talked about throughout the entire semester like how to run queries fast, how to to make sure that if you crash and come back you don't lose any data, all that is still applicable here. It's just now we're talking about how to do this across multiple uh multiple machines. Okay. Then also recall we had the discussion

when we talked about parallel query execution on a single node. We made the distinction between parallel database systems and uh distributed database systems right and I said in a parallel data system it's think of that like a single machine could have you know multiple cores or multiple CPU sockets and the the communication between these different workers in our database would be very fast and assumed to be reliable right like you know we can send messages over an IPC from one process or one

thread to the next and it's guaranteed to show up right if it doesn't show up then our CPU is melting down we have other problems. So now for distributed data systems now we can't ignore some of the things we could ignore in parallel data systems for example we can't assume that communicating between the nodes is going to be fast right because I might have to go around the other side of the planet and now you're you're limited by the speed of light and that can take you know 100 300 milliseconds worst case

scenario up in the tens of seconds or even minutes if things get lost and things recovered in weird ways and so not only is communication between the workers going to be much slower orders of magnitude slower. It's also potentially unreliable, meaning we could send a message from one node to the next and that message may not show up because the never network never got severed, the packet got dropped, whatever, right? or in in some cases and this is sometimes common too is that I send my message to the other worker or to the

other node and it's running you know go or java what pick pick your favorite memory managed environment and then the garbage collector kicks in like in the JVM it can like if you have a huge heap the JVM can block or sorry the garbage collector can block block all execution for like I don't know 10 30 seconds worst case scenario so now it looks like that node is not doesn't doesn't exist anymore but it's just waiting need to clean some stuff up before I can process your message. So now how do you how do

you actually want to handle that? So if you take a distributed systems course, they talk a lot about consensus uh consensus protocols, right? Paxus, raph, things like that. All that is be applicable here. We we'll build up to that. We first understand what the architecture of our data system is going to look like and then we'll apply these different techniques to layer on top of them and make these things more reliable and fault tolerant. Right? So this is what I've already said before, right? Just because we're going

multi-node doesn't mean we can throw away the entire textbook or everything we talked about this entire semester. All the things we talked about uh so far are matter in this world as well. It's just everything's more complicated now because we're dealing with multiple hardware or multiple machines potentially running in different data centers and in some cases with disparate hardware resources like my node over in that other data center there might have fewer cores than I do. So now I got to

take consider that in my how I do my query optimization, my planning, how I'm going to maybe run my conversio protocol, what transaction should run where, all that we have to we have to deal with. So there's some high level design decisions we're going to cover for the next two lectures of how to build a distributed data system. The first is going to be like how does an application find the data, right? What if now my database can be split across multiple nodes or managed by multiple nodes who does the

application actually talk to right it was simple when it was you know one node I just connect to it through whatever the communication protocol the network protocol that the that the the data center exposed to me I know my data is going to be there but now if my data is split across multiple machines how do I go and find it and where do I send the actual queries to to to it then we're talk about how we want to divide the resources of the database system across these different uh workers or nodes,

right? How do we split things up on a per table basis or we do something more fine grain? And again, and then how does the application know that I split things up a certain way, if at all, to go find the data that needs to run the query? And then when a query shows up on one of these workers in our distributed system, how are they going to execute that query? Especially if the data that that the query needs to access isn't on the machine that my query is actually running. Do I send do I do I send the

you know the the query to where the data is located or do I pull the data to where where I'm located my query's executing and run things there and then of course again as I sort of said in in the world of distributed systems this matters a lot and we you know the distributed system is basically a database system that that at the end of the day so how to make sure that we we guarantee consistency and correctness across our entire uh database system so that the application doesn't deal with

any of the anomalies and issues that we've talked about before and in some systems they're just going to say throw caution to the wind and say well you know doing guaranteeing consistency and correctness is hard so we're not going to really do it we're not we're not going to do it immediately and then you know what are the implications of that in your application okay so for today's lecture it's going to be sort of a hodgepodge of ideas of building up the basics of a you know

what a distributed data system is going to look like for us and then next class we'll go in more detail how we're going to do distributed control and we're how we're going to run uh distributed OLAP queries. So distributed analytical queries or how do we do joins across multiple nodes for example. Okay. So first talk about what the high level system architectures could look like. Then we'll talk about how to split up the data and our partitioning schemes. Then we'll talk about replication. How

to make sure that if we have multiple copies of data we need for fault tolerance. How to make sure that those are going to be in sync. And then then we'll segue into how to do transactions across these things. Right? Again, another key difference about distributed databases and parallel databases is that parallel databases, you're adding more resources to get better performance. In a distributed database system, we want to do that as well. We want to add more resources to get better performance. But in

sometimes, you also want to add more resources so we get better fault tolerance or availability. So if one node goes down, right, this the application can still keep running and query query the database, right? Again, if it's a parallel running on a single box, that's kind of hard to do. All right. So the first thing we're going to discuss is what the system architecture is going to look like. And this is going to specify or or this is going to determine how the resources that are available to us uh in in you

know on a machine on a computing machine how they're going to be accessed and maintained by the database system and then how these resources are are going to communicate with each other right and you sort of think like the CPU is obviously the the central central process unit but it's like it's the the computational unit on a single node in our system But it has to have memory. It has to have disk. The question is where is the disk and where's the memory amongst other nodes in in the system.

So this terminology goes back to the 1980s. It's it's the definition of these categories of what these databases look like. So without you knowing it, everything we've talked about this semester so far is called a shared everything system. And the idea is that on a single node, it has the CPU and the CPU can talk to its own memory and can talk to its own disk. Right? Everything is encapsulated on on a single box. A shared nothing system is where there is individual nodes that each have their

own CPU, their own local memory and their own local disk. And the only way they can communicate with other nodes in a distributed system is through some highle network up above. So basically the the CPU on one node can't read into the memory or disk of another node directly. It has to send a message that the CPU then processes on the other node and say, "Hey, I want this block of data or I want you to do this for me." And gets get back gets back the result. And this network most often is going to be

TCP IP. There are some systems where they can do UDP. Uh some systems can do more fancy things with like Melanox, RDMA, but in general like assume that you're just, you know, opening up TCP sockets and sending messages back and forth. Another architecture is called shared disk. And this is where every node is going to have its own again its own CPU and own memory. But the database the primary resting location of the database is now going to be on some global disk that all the nodes can can read and write to.

Right? Right. So now if I want to send a message to another node, you know, you you still would do TCP blah blah blah, but if I want to read data, I could, you know, on another node, I don't have to go to over TCP IP to communicate with other nodes. I go directly down to the disk uh and and go and get it. And then this one is theoretical. Uh it's in it's in the academic literature, but I'm not aware of any system that actually does this outside of like the high performance computing world, like

scientific stuff. It's called shared memory. Basically every every node only has a stateless CPU and then the memory and the the disk is shared across all the different uh different nodes. >> The yeah this question is isn't a shared everything system fundamentally a shared memory system. Yeah. So just think about have multiple nodes right? If I have multiple of these shared everything, then I'm essentially shared nothing because again the CPU can't read and write to the disk or

memory on the other nodes without going through the network at the top. >> The question is shared everything fundamentally single machine. Yes. >> The question is are we treating shared discs having multiple disc meaning like I'm showing one but it can have more. Yeah, we'll get there. Yes. But it looks logically as one disk that everyone can read and write to. >> S3. Yes. They are correct. We're getting there. S3 would be shared disc. >> The question is is for share nothing is

the network. What? Sorry. uh for for ingress >> for us like >> uh for like for data coming in >> well no no so like if I if a query we haven't talked about like what we're communicating with say a query shows up on one of these nodes right this middle node here and that query needs to read data on this other node it's got to can't go reach into that other node into a disk directly or it memory and go read stuff. It's got to send a message that the CPU then process and says, "Oh, they

want this data. Let me send it back over to you." So shared everything is most common because most people build a single node data system first, right? For shared nothing, this was the way you would build a distributed database going back to the 1980s. like the guy in the man of Postgress uh Mike Stobreaker wrote a paper in 86 sort of touting the advantage of shared nothing systems and this is how people built basically shared nothing systems for 20 30 years. Uh it it is the popularity is on the decline now because

of the cloud things like S3 and other distributed architectures like most of the the the newer systems today are are going to be shared disk. Yes. >> Question is spanner shared nothing or shared disc. Spanner is shared nothing but it reads and writes from Borg like the shed file system. So like the lines get blurred, right? All right. This last one here, this as far as I know, nobody does this. So we're not spend any time on it. All right. So share nothing. Share nothing and again is every single node has its own local

disk and own local memory. And then anytime you need to communicate with other node, you got again got to send a message over that network. So again, you can't just go reach down into the into the other node and get the data you want, right? So this is going to get the best performance you can have in a distributed data system because every node can process the data that that it just has. Uh and it's it's it's going to be the most efficient way to access things, right? Because I don't have to

go reach in other nodes, go get the data that I need. I can go process everything I I need locally, right? The challenge is going to be and this is why in the cloud world the shared disc is more popular is that this can be harder to scale out. If I want to add new nodes I can't just say you have new nodes now point to the the same shared disc. I actually get to physically move data and we'll see we'll see an an example in a second. Right, next slide. Right, so that's why again this is going to get

the best performance. But if I have to start adding and dropping nodes, right, either because I want to scale up and add more machine or scale out and add add more machines or because a node goes down and got to recover from it, then this is probably problematic. So again, there's a lot of systems in the space uh you know, I can't say anyone is more popular than others, but like this is basically how people build. People say they have a distributed data system from the 80s or 90s or mid-200s, it's going

to be shared nothing. All right. So, here's what it looks like. So, you have the application server and then it can communicate to some kind of catalog metadata uh thing, right? And again, this could be just another node in in a system, could be a centralized node. We'll get to that architecture in a second, but the case this is going to say here's how here's how to go find the data you're looking for. And then say we we want to run a query get or get ID equals 200. So we would

each node would have again a partition or a different subset of the the total table or the the total amount of data in our database. For now assume we only have one table and it it has ids from from one to 300. So if I want to again I send my I know I want to get access ID equals 200. I know this node is maintaining this data. So I send my query to that node and it can process it and return the result. No problem there. Right? But then the challenge is going to be if I want to start doing things

like I want to get ID equals 100 and ID equals 200 in the same query and I send or sorry and I send the query to the first node here the the the different nodes are aware of the topology of the of the database of the partitioning scheme that's defined in the catalog again we'll cover that in a second. So it knows that that the top node doesn't have ID equals to 200. So it has to send a message down here to say I need ID equals 200 and it could either tell the node down below run this query

or this portion of the query give me ID 200 and give give me back the result or it could actually just send the the actual data itself up and then let the node at the top process the data. Right now the chin the challenge I was saying is that this is going to get great performance if all your queries are only accessing data that's on each individual node. Um but when I want to scale out meaning I want to add a new machine then the problem is that now I have to move data around. So if I add a new node in

the middle here I got to know take half the data that I had in the node at the bottom half data that had a node at the top and move copy that into the the middle one here. And then you update the catalog service and say here's the data is moved around so anybody comes looking for that data we'll find it. Yes. >> So the question is would the application server know the data ranges? Ideally no some systems yes but ideally no. Again if you think about in in SQL the the same query that I could write on on a

database that runs on a single box that same query should still work in a distributed database system. like I should be I have completely transparent to me how the data is moving around right so my example beginning it connect to the application server some system will do that you can go to the application server say where's my data going to be and other systems you could just send it to any one of these nodes and they know where the data is because it's in the catalog and the catalog is

just another database we haven't really talked about cataloges too much but like you have your data like the the user data the application data and then you have this metadata catalog that keeps track of like here's the tables I have here's the schemas that they I have the columns, I have the constraints. Well, now you can also start putting things like here's the partitioning scheme or here's my layout of my data, my topology of my network. And then you want the same sort of transactional guarantees

you want for regular application data, you want that to be in your catalog data too. >> Question is the question is how how should I maintain indexes in this right? So in some cases like where ID equals you know this this range here each each node in this environment would have an index just for the the data that they have and again if if all my queries are like get ID equals 200 get equals 100 I can look at the SQL query figure out what data it actually needs send the data to that node and that node can then do its own

lookup in its own slice of the index right so each node has a has a has a portion of the total index there's also the case where you may have secondary indexes where you may have things that don't that don't that don't align up with how you're splitting up the data and that you got to put either on a one node that everyone goes to and talks to or you replicated across all nodes. The question is if I in if I insert something and it has to >> because like this node is full.

>> We'll cover that in a second. This how we handle partitioning. We'll talk about that second. Um uh depending on the partitioning scheme depending on your criteria whether you know when you actually want to move data you know you make that decision when you want to do that and then depending on the partitioning scheme like consistent hashing or rende hashing like some some nodes make it some schemes make it very easy to move data around this is just like a toy example this I'm doing range

partitioning here but I would say what you're what you're talking about is actually what MongoDB did in early days sort of what part of the reason MongoDB got popular in like early 2010s was they had this capability auto sharding. So they had the ability to do exactly as you were saying like oh my too full or all the queries going here they could split off a chunk of it and rebalance things automatically but it was a total hack because they didn't guarantee that the catalog was in sync with the data

got moved. So you may have two copies of the data on two nodes or two partitions and two two different queries might see might update the same thing and get incorrect result like or they took a lock on entire database and then move things around. That's another way to handle it. Yes. >> Why doesn't the question is so for this query here ID equals 100 and ID equals 200. It's one say it's one query right select star from where ID in 100 200. So your question is why didn't the why didn't

the note at the top send the query down here or what? Sorry tool back to >> oh the question is why didn't the uh good good point why didn't this node here send the ID equals 200 result sub result back to the application server because like the think of how the application server communicates with the data server. It sends say this is one query right select star not two two gets right they send one select query to one node and then the call and response protocol of JDBC ODBC is that I'm going

to get one result back with the all the answer all the tuples I want for my query the the applications aren't written such that you can send one query and now get two things back right is not how people write these code and in the same way that like I mean you can imagine you could change the API to do that but like the like on the client drivers to support this but like it's the thing I was saying before like this if I write the same query and runs on a single node it should behave I should

get back the roughly approximately the same result I would if it's even across multiple nodes >> the database itself should be treated as yeah like that's the point of SQL SQL you don't know how the data is being split up so I just My SQL query gets sent to the server and the server then decides how to farm it out across the different nodes and then the application should know shouldn't care. >> Question is so master >> the question is should I think of these nodes as being all homogeneous or would

there be a master or primary node? Not yet. for this example. Just the key thing about these examples trying to show is that like every node has a slice of the database and the other node at the top can't just go down and go look at it. It has to send messages. >> Let me keep going and then come up. All right. Right. So again, if I add a new node, I got to move things around. All right. So share disk and the idea here is that the every every every node in my system is going to have its own local CPU own

local memory. They are gonna have local disk too like directly attached store like an SSD. Uh but that can be that's only really used for caching like my memory full gets full I want to spill to that. But the primary storage location of the database is going to be down on this shared disk infrastructure down below. And as as they pointed out oh is this S3? Yes. So this is going to be like some distributed file system or kind of distributed object store like Amazon S3 or Azure blob store their GCS

cloud comput storage right Google right the basic idea is that it's this this single logical device where all the nodes can read read and write to right and that's considered the primary resting database uh the resting location of of the database right so when people talk about data lakes or serverless systems right it looks a lot like this and And most of the the newer data systems, distributed data systems built in the last 10 years, especially for analytical workloads like the the snowflakes, the data bricks, the the

fireballs, yellow bricks and all those guys, all of them are going to be look look a lot like this, right? So now the architecture is is basically same as before, but now we have this shared storage thing on the back and query shows up. In this case here, we're ignoring the fact how do we find where the node I want to communicate with is assuming it's been told through this through the catalog service or some front end. And now that this query wants to get again ID equal 101, it goes to the

catalog and say it says who's responsible for this? Where do I go find this data? Now I can make a a request for a page or a block or a file whatever from the the the distributed file system and it goes then makes a copy of that and brings it back into its memory. So same here I get 102 I know it's on page XYZ. So I go to my storage device and go go and get it right and then now again when I add a new new node in my distributed system unlike before in shared nothing where I had to copy data

around now I I only have to do a logical assignment in the catalog to say this new node is now responsible for data found within some range or some some partition. So I don't have to move any data when I add this new node. It's just now all the other nodes need to be aware that this node in the middle now is responsible for Q101 whereas before the one at the top was yes >> question is do we need to have different nodes be responsible for different ranges can't just be any node can handle

any any possible data if we'll get in a second if you start doing updates to that data how do you know if I update if you know how do I know if I update on this node who has a copy of that data and make sure that they see it because again when it was all in a single box if I update something it's like the global data is everyone sees but if this bottom guy here updates key 102 but then the nodes at the top have a copy of key 102 as well how do I make sure that they get notified that they

have the latest version >> what's that >> locking on what Yes. >> Yes. >> Yes. Where's the lock? >> Everywhere. >> Everywhere. >> So that means like for if I want to lock one thing, I got to broadcast to everyone. I hold the lock for it. >> Is that a good idea? >> Okay. Can it be can be a primary node or master node? Yes. We'll get there in a second. Well, this is the exact same I was just saying. So, say I now update page 101, right? I then write to the page here,

but now I got to notify potentially everyone else to say if you have a copy of page ABC, I've updated 101 in this way, right? And so that anytime that they go read this data, they would know that uh they have to go, you know, fetch the latest version either either from the node that's responsible for it or from the shared disk. Again, we'll cover how we do that in a second. The other great thing about sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh sh share disc dis ar ar ar ar ar ar ar ar

ar ar ar ar ar ar ar ar ar ar ar architechures too and again this is why they they they they're so prominent now in the cloud uh is that this storage is basically infinite meaning if I want to add additional capacity that's trivial to do in S3 because I just I give Amazon more money and I get I get more space like your your credit card will run out of money before Amazon runs out of storage space for you right and then if I add more capacity I don't have to move things around or take even take nodes offline

in the same way that I would have in a shared share nothing system. I want to add new disc or share nothing. I got to you know add go physically add that into the box itself. >> The question is why does why is the performance in a shared disc architecture worse than a shared nothing architecture? Because I got to communicate with some other device to get the get the data that I need. And for OLTP, the way you get around that, you just have every node cache it, right? But then you still have to care

about like if I update things, like I have to still make it back out here. >> Question is, yeah, is the slowdown due to the the the overhead of the network IO for updating disc? Yes. Also, again, if I if I if I have a transaction, we're not there yet. If I have a transaction that touches multiple nodes and I go say commit, I got to get everyone to agree that now it's okay to commit this. So now I'm sending you a message. I got to wait for you to come back and acknowledge that you got my

commit message. Like that that becomes problematic as well. But that's going to happen in share nothing or shared disk as well, right? Shared disc specifically, it's going to have the overhead of of communicating to disk somewhere else. All right. So we sort of been talking about this concept as well like how we're actually now going to execute queries either whether it's share disk or share nothing right and has to do with when I when a query shows up and on a node and I recognize that the data I

need on that node for this particular query isn't local to me either because it's not in my local cache or or I it's not my local disc because I'm responsible for it. it's on some other node or the the shared disk architecture right some some remote storage device how am I going to actually how do I decide whether I want to pull the data to me and so I can run my query or do I push my query or the portion of the query I want to execute to where the data is actually residing so the two approaches again push it's

push versus pull so pushing the query to the data means that I I can carve off either the entire take the entire query or a portion of the query and send it to whatever the the data is being located and assuming I have compute capacity or some computing resource like something I can execute things on the where the data is being located I can then run the you know the portion of the query that I need on that remote storage and then have it send back to me the result of that that computation pulling the data of the query means that

I'm going to the data is at some other location I'm basically going to copy the bytes out directly to where my node is over the network. So that then I can run run it as if I had the data local to me already. Again, these are not mutually exclusive and the lines get blurry because the the in some of these systems the storage layer can actually do some computation. So just taking S3 for example, S3 although they've it's not deprecated but if you sign up for a new account today you can't get this but if you have an

existing account with AWS as of last year you can get this but they have a they have a um they have a feature called S3 select where you can send a request to S3 and say go get this data for me but then you also tag along a SQL query that then does some processing on the on the node where the data is actually being stored and then they send back to you the the the the subset of the result. So you can use it for filtering. You obviously can't do joins or more complex computation, but you can

push down predicates to S3 so that now you pay less egress cost of the network transfer cost going from S3 to your your storage device. Yes. >> Question is why do they deprecate it? I don't know. >> A bad idea. >> Do I think it's a bad question? Do I think it's a bad idea? Do I think it's a bad business idea or do I think it's a bad database idea? database. >> I think it's a bad database idea because this is super useful. But I don't know many systems actually use it. But it

makes sense, right? If I have, you know, a bunch of I have a one pabyte of data on S3 and I don't want to have to transfer all that to me if I can do some push down some predicates. Now again, you can't how do you say this? >> Your database performance is out of your control. The question is the issue is now that the the a core component of your database is now outside your control. Yes, but like this is and I know I made a big deal saying like don't trust the OS. The OS is going to ruin our lives and now

I'm saying go trust Amazon to do something right. So it depends on depends what you're trying to do. Uh for some things yes or some things no. This might be a good idea, right? For simple things maybe it's okay. But like and assuming you can paralyze it enough like assuming you can you can have enough concurrent requests to different S3 buckets and they can all do the the the processing parallel right. So now I can take my single box that has maybe like you know 20 cores but if I have a thousand outstanding

request S3 I don't think they let you do that but like I could have all them run as if there was a thousand cores doing filtering at the same time. Now, you pay for that, right? And it might be cheaper to do the processing yourself, but then you got to account for like the cost of moving the pediby of data out of S3 to to you. But then you can cache that in the local SSD, but now you got to pay for that to caching. You know, I mean, there's like there's trade-offs to all these things.

>> Good question. It's a one time assuming that you doesn't get evicted because you you brought something else in, right? All the bufferable stuff we talked about before still matters. >> Yes. But is there a way to like do it yourself by like having some objects? >> The question is without the without doing this S3 select, is there a way to get this achieve this on on in the data center side uh where you don't have to maybe pull the entire buckets in. Yes. So you so it's all the same stuff we

talked about before like just because it's running on S3 doesn't change like that we care about indexes, we care about filters, the zone map stuff. like if I have enough metadata up in my my database system about what's in my S3 buckets, I can make more precise decisions on what data I'm actually feeding in. Absolutely. Yes. But like you, you know, someone has to write that logic and that'll be in the data center and assumes that you even have that metadata to begin with. If you

have, if someone's putting down parket files in buckets you never seen before, you don't have any metadata until you go actually read it. But then you go read the footer and that that'll give you the metadata that way. So then you read less and decide whether you need to read the rest of the file. >> What's that? >> You got to read the footer and bring it bring it into the data server side. But that footer is going to be I don't know a megabyte if that. But again all the same stuff we talked

about before like I want to do predicate push down projection push down. Uh I want to use zone maps and other filters to decide what's the bare minimum data I need to read. Just because it's S3 versus a local dicks on the same same box that all the same principles apply. Now it's just harder. Um, right. So, so in the case Microsoft, they have, you know, not as not as sophisticated as S3, but it's basically same idea, right? All right. So, pushing query the data. The idea here is that uh I if I say I

know that I want to run this query here and the data I need for that query is down below. Rather than moving all the data up to compute this join up into the node at the top, I'll send down a plan fragment and say, "Hey, I want to do this join in on RNS. I know you have the data in the range between 101 and 200. Compute the local join on this node down here and then send me up now the result of the join or at least the partial result of the join and then I I can combine together the result in in the node at the top.

Now again I'm showing this in a in a shared nothing architecture but the same concept applies in in a shared disc architecture. It's just more more readily apparent that you could do it this way. In a shared disc system the the idea is that the nodes are responsible for again for for for managing some logical portion of the data right but the final physical resting place of that data is going to be out on the on the disk. So this in this case here, assuming there's nothing in our local caches, this query

shows up and I want to do the same join I was doing before, but the node at the top is say I know the node at the bottom is responsible for for data within this range. So rather than me computing the pulling from the the shared disc, computing the joint at the top, I'm going to send my plan fragment down to the bottom guy, tell them to compute the the the partial result for the join, it knows how to go out to the shared disc, the shared storage, and get all the data it needs. bring bring that copy back

into its its you know local cache. Then the bottom guy here computes the port part of the join that it's responsible for. Sends the result up to the node at the top and the node over the top then can either you know union the results together and puts the final result or there's additional things it wants to do as part of the query. It knows how to then further process them as as needed. So again another key distinction here in in a shared disc with the shared nothing architecture in in a shared disk

architecture I'm showing the same partitioning ranges that we had in shared nothing but again this is a logical partitioning so the final resting the data is going to always be on shared disk we're saying that for this point in time this node at the bottom is responsible for the data within this range. So if an update comes along, we know that it has to go to this node here because that'll be again the primary or the master, whatever you want to call it. That's where it the change

has to apply applied first and then this node is responsible for them making sure that things get propagated to the other nodes in in the cluster or the system. >> Yes, >> server. >> Boom. Next slide. Okay. How are we set to partition things? Right. So again we want to split the database across multiple resources either disk or nodes or or processes right uh in my examples here I'm showing we're partitioning on keys within the table right like this sort of fine grain partitioning we're

trying to say I'm going to pick one one or more columns in my tables and that's going to be the partitioning key and I'll I'll use whatever the the partitioning mechanism I'm going to have to then decide what partition it's going to get assigned to doesn't have to be that fine grain can be more coarse grain like in in yellow brick and snowflake they partition on them files a bunch of you know parquet files sitting in S3 and they're going to say which node is going

to be responsible for them right and the idea is that if I partition my database across these different disjoint subsets or not they're not always disjoint but they usually are then I just write my query against that data there's something that's coordinating figuring out where the data is all being located it knows how to send the plan fragments to those nodes that are responsible for those partitions to compute some portion of the query and then I know how to combine the results back together to

produce the the final result. And in the case of shared nothing, it's going to be physically partitioned like the data itself the the the final resting place or the primary search location of the data is going to be within the partition running on a single node or in the case of shared disc. logical partitioning in that we're we're saying that the the there's some node in our in our system is is responsible for that partition of data but the final resting place has to be back on on

shared disc you sort of think of like in a shared disc architecture the the the nodes themselves are stateless meaning if one of those guys gets killed and crashes come back and crashes I don't lose any data because the shared disc is the final resting place for it and I know that's always going to be there long as My credit card still works with Amazon. >> Yes. >> So the entire semester we talked about database built for the DMS and now that we're talking about SH you keep mentioning. So

like what use? >> All right. So question is uh during the entire semester I keep saying uh oh we're going to have a you know here's the file layout and within that there's pages and the pages have these slotted page architecture right or the the LSM stuff and now I keep mentioning parquet. Why do I mention that in the context of distributed databases? So, parquet files are just a open source columnar file format that are very common in distributed uh shared disk OLAP systems, right? And

the what parquet allows you to do is like you can have one application create a bunch of data and just write it to S3 without going through the database server and then the data server then can can run queries on it. Right? So, it's just it's a file format and it's very common. we use this in in a shared disc cloud system like lakehouse system doesn't have to be and everything I've seen what I'm saying so far is I'm not defining what's actually in these the the data I'm storing in the shared disc

or even on the in the share nothing system I'm just mentioning parka is is is an example what people do in the cloud systems but it's still going to be you know at the high level it's still going to be all the stuff we talked about the entire semester like it's be a pack layout or be a slide of pages or lsm right >> but isn't it true that your data will always >> So question is why saving is it's not true that that like the the files are always going to come from an outside

application yes most of the data will come through into the data server as inserts especially in OTP we're just going to write that write that in that doesn't change >> I'm just surprised that we're suddenly okay like some random old standard open source >> parquet >> yeah I wouldn't say part is random. It's used everywhere >> and old. I mean it's I mean >> is it isn't it true that our own file format will always be better >> uh the question wait the file format for

for like in this class. >> Yeah. >> Question is is it >> mean in general for that? >> Yeah. So his statement is is it not tr is it not true that a customized file format will be better than a general purpose open- source file format um for it depends on on it's a copout depends on the workload depends on the data depends on the where the heart where the environment you're actually running your data system right so >> what's that >> yeah So we'll get we'll get this.

There's a philosophical discussion to be had about where to spend your energy when you're building a new database system. So Snowflake famously decided we're not going to go shared nothing. We're going to be shared disc. I'll get your answer by the file for in a second. But Snowflake said, "We're not gonna we don't want to be shared nothing because if I'm shared nothing, then I gotta build the the basically a distributed I got to make sure that like my storage is

is is fault tolerant in sync and keep these things, you know, synchronized and things like that." And they decided they're not going to do that. They said, "We're going to build everything off of S3 and just, you know, put caching in front of that on these stateless nodes so that we can run, you know, hide the latency cost of doing this." And then the the thought was let's spend all our energy snowflakes energy on engineering time on making this thing as fast as possible

and then we'll put caching in front of that to hide this latency and then as Amazon makes this better we we'll get that you know get that benefit for free. So that was one of that was one of the smart things that they did in the early days. Now again that kind of goes against what I said before like we want to control everything but for distributed OLAP it's kind of you know it's it's it's okay to do that. Because again it's if if I'm a startup it's one less thing I have to build.

Amazon's going to put a bunch of engineers making this work really great for all TP maybe less so because I really came out like performance latency stuff. All right. So now your question about the file format thing right. So if I could like how to say this database systems are usually trying to be this general purpose uh software that can accommodate as many application scenarios as possible and hardware you know discrepancies or different hardware characteristics and different operating environments right so it is true that if

I have an application that that that I I could build a datab server that could sol serve one application. I can build a, you know, a optimized customized version of everything we've talked about the entire semester and make that one application run as fast as possible. Absolutely. Yes, you could do that. If you're trying to make a general purpose though, that's actually not feasible. So now you got to make decisions of what's the sort of what's the lowest common denominator I would

need to be able to support a larger application so that I can sell my database system and then not have, you know, huge performance bottlenecks. So you said parket is all parquet came out in 2011 20 2013 right so it's 12 years old now uh at the time that was considered a state-of-the-art file format because everyone was storing things in JSON or CSVs right so you're beating those but then now are there better compression protocols and more advanced ways of accessing uh columnar data yes and parquet has not really kept

up with that and that's why there's like vortex and all these other file formats that are coming along but again I'm I'm only bringing that up to say in a in the cloud uh and distributed data systems for for analytical workloads often times what's going to be in the storage layer is going to be bunch of parket files and can you build better ones? Yes. And the spiral guys and others are trying to do that. Okay. All right. So partitioning. All right. So there's so one basic way

to do partitioning uh is to do table partitioning meaning like I'll put one have one node be responsible for one table and another node be responsible for another table and I literally split up that coarse grain and you do you can more coarse grain like I have one node be responsible for a database this database and one node responsible for that database of course if not I need to access data across multiple tables and across multiple databases if I'm doing this naive scheme it becomes problematic

but in some scenarios This works out just fine. So again, same idea. This has two tables, one and two. I'm literally going to take all the data from the first table, put in one node here, all the data in the second table, put it on another node here. As long as my query is only access data with one table, then I'm I'm happy. I'm great. Right? Of course, now if my table doesn't fit on the single partition, then this becomes problematic and I got to do something else. So I've I've come across this actually with

uh people using where um they had the the regular database where most of the application data was was partitioned in the way we'll talk about next slide. Um but then they had one table was basically a log for the application. They only inserted into it and they never read it. So they wanted to put that table or collection in in parlance on a single partition or single node by itself because this is just inserted and make that run as fast as possible and didn't interfere with any other uh updates on any other nodes.

So this is not that common but some system some systems that do let you do this and in some cases we'll see this when we talk about OLAP queries next class uh instead of just putting you know you you put the entire table at at a node but you you'll make a replica of it on every every node because it's like something really small like a zip code table. There's only like 35,000 records that's not that big and I I make a copy of that on every single node. So anytime a query wants to run it always has can

be the local copy of that table. The question is, doesn't that introduce also the cost of updates every time? Yeah, but like for some cases that those tables aren't updated that often. The the the postal service updates the zip code table four times a year, right? Like it's not that often. All right. So, what is most common and what people normally think about in uh in distributed is doing what's called horizontal partitioning. And in the NoSQL guys, they'll call this sharding.

It's basically the same thing. And then we're going to split the we'll show an example of doing sort of fine grain uh horizontal partitioning where within one table we're going to look at some uh partitioning column or columns and we're going to use that to decide how we're going to split things up. And the goal here is we want to split the data up in according to some other a bunch of objectives like make sure every every node has the same amount of data. Make sure that every node is going to run the

same amount of queries. Right? You may have one node that have a small amount of data, but it gets all the queries in. So therefore, you don't you don't want to put more data on it because that'll slow down uh that'll over sort of overwhelm it. So the the two most common schemes that do horizontal partitioning is to do uh hash partitioning and range partitioning. Range partitioning we've already seen, right? I I just took like discrete subsets of of r of values uh that are continuous ranges within my my

keyspace of a column and I'm just assigning those to to different nodes. And how you come up with the the optimal ranges, you know, depends on what you're trying to, you know, uh what your objective function is. Predicate partitioning uh horizontal partitioning is is not that common. The basic idea is that you just define where clauses to say, you know, where name equals Andy and age equals 1 2 3 that goes to this node and then where a name equals Andy and age equals 456 that goes to another

node. Right? basically defining the wear clauses how to split data up and then roundroin partitioning is just assigning one you know some tupless or files or data to you know one node in a roundrobin fashion but like I said hashing and and range partition is more more common so say this is our table again we have four columns here uh and we're going to pick one of them as the partitioning key right it could be multiple ones could usually it's the primary key but it doesn't always have

to be Right? And then now if we're doing hash partitioning, what we're going to do is for every single tupil, we're going to take whatever the value is for that partitioning column, partitioning key, and we're going to hash it mod by the number of partitions we have in our system, in this case, four. And then that's going to determine how we're going to assign the data from these different tupils to to these different partitions, right? And if most my queries or if my queries just have the partition key in

the wear clause, then this is going to be fantastic for me because I can just look at the catalog and say, well, I know uh I I know what the key I know what the key I know the value being used as a for the partition key, look at my wear clause. I hash it in the same way I did for when I move the data in the beginning. And that's going to tell me which node has the data that I'm looking for. So for shared disk right basic idea looks like this right I want to get ID equals one assuming I've done you know

some amount of partitioning um and it knows that it can can get data from the different nodes that that it needs right in this case here if if I had to get multiple keys and one of those keys aren't in my node that I need then I know I need to go communicate with the guy at the top either to send the query that I that I want it to run for me or pull the data down that I need to then run things locally. And again this is logical partitioning because again the final resting place of the data is out here on the shared disk.

Share nothing again the final resting place of the data is actually on the nodes themselves. So depending on the queries I'm executing uh I know how to route the things that go get the data that I need. We've already covered this. All right. In the case of hash partitioning what's one key problem with this approach? All right. So the question is any other query that doesn't have the partition key has to get broadcast to everyone. Yes. Or even if I have the partitioning key but I do a range query then that's

going to break me as well because like now I you know if it's between partition key between one and a th00and uh I may not have you know a continuous range but then again I so I don't know what the data is actually going to be located but I'm just hashing things. So this doesn't work again if it's very fine grain and you're doing things that aren't exactly the the quality predicate I need for my my lookup. What's another problem with this? >> Change. >> Boom. Another another partition shows

up, another node shows up or another one of these partition dies, right? And then now before when I was taking the hash and modding my uh four, now I got to go through and mod by five. And now the location of the data may change because what it get mapp what partition it gets mapped to has has changed. Right? So again range partitioning is going to have the same problem because if I add a new node then I I have to start shuffling ranges around and it may not be isolated to just you know moving data

from from a single single partition. >> Yes. stable. >> Can you use stable partitioning? Next slide. All right. So, there's two ways to get around this problem. And the first be would be consistent hashing. Uh, which was the hot thing 10 years ago or so. Uh, and then the uh the next one would be Rond hashing. And consistent hashing is a subset of Rond hashing, but consistent hashing is is it's neat. Uh, it was pretty cool when it came out. Like there's a when Amazon created

Dynamo DB in the 2000s, they put a paper out and said we're using kisses and hashing because there was an MIT paper from 99 or 2000 that talked about this for in a in a project called CORD. Uh and so a lot of these distributed databases, the the the NoSQL guys, the share nothing systems that came out, you know, around 2010 or so, they're all using this technique. Actually, show of hands, who here has heard of consistent hashing before? Uh less than half. Okay, so the basic idea is that the the the

key range is going to be a circle from 0 to one. And the idea is that when I hash something, it's going to tell me where I'm going to land on the circle and then I just move forward along the circle until I find the next node going in a clockwise fashion. And that's or the next partition and that's going to turn determine where the data I'm looking for can be found or where the data I want to insert should should be located. So say we had three partitions P1, P2, P3 and then now I want to hash P1 and I hash it

and then I you know then make it between the the value range 0 and one. So I'm going to land somewhere in the circle and then now I know I just need to scan forward in clockwise fashion and whatever partition I find along the ring of the circle at that point is where my data should be located. Same thing if I hash key two over here, I land at some point in the circle and then I have to again scan up and try to find my my my next next partition. So you sort of think the gap here between the the two partitions along the

circle this corresponds to the data that they're responsible for. So so P1 is responsible for everything going backwards up to P3. P3 is everything responsible going backwards to P2 and so forth, right? All right. So how does this solve this this partitioning thing that we talked about or when I add a new partition? Well, say I add a new partition P4 down here. Then I know that the only thing I need to move is the data that P3 was managing when I cut its part of the circle in half. And so all

the data now from P4 to P2, that needs to get moved out of P3 and go now to P4. And everybody else on on the circle doesn't get affected by this. Likewise, I I add P5 up here. Same thing. I split it and move the data around. And I keep doing it like this. So then the data structure you're going to use, I think they use a red black tree or something. You need a data structure that everyone keeps coordinated to keep track of like here's where here's what the current ring looks like and here's the partitions that are

available to you when you do these lookups. >> Yes. So this will not require each >> the question is in this example here this is not required that the partitions are equally distributed the data. Yeah. So the way you get around that one is that you have virtual partitions where you know that like multiple partitions along the ring will be assigned to a single node and if you have enough of those then then assuming you're not terribly skewed right you know assume that your partition key isn't just a

value one everyone has the same value then you know things will be distributed enough enough for you all right so another thing that they can do and we'll talk about replication in a second is that I can now use the ring to help keep track of uh where data should be replicated to. So say I want a certain data into uh into my to my my database. When I first hash it, it's going to land it, tell me it go it goes into P1, but then I follow along the ring and say I want to replicate this three times, right? I have three copies

of the data. Let's talk about how we handle that in a second. So I know that the the primary location of the data should be in P1. I'm also going to make a copy into P6 and P2 because they're now the the next keys I see in or the next partitions I see along the ring. And then now when I want to do a lookup, right, I look for, you know, looking for key one, it hashes, lands at this point in the ring. And I know I can either look at any of these three copies of the data of these different partitions to

find the thing that that I'm looking for. And we'll talk about how you know how in sync these things are going to be in the NoSQL world. When I do a write into P1, it's not going to immediately get propagated to P6 or P2. And then now I get into like inconsistent issues which goes back to asset stuff. We we were talking about a few more lectures. We'll we'll cover that in a second. So as I said, Amazon used this approach in Dynamo DB. Uh but then that was in the the paper they put out. In the later

follow-up paper they put out, you know, four or five years ago, they they they announced they they weren't using this, but consistent hashing is used in a lot of systems. Snowflake is going to use this to assign uh files to workers or or data partitions to workers. Um Couchbase uses this internally. Cassandra uses this for again for distributing things across the key. React was a startup out of Boston um that was was a was a distributed key value store and they they they went under I 10 years ago. You can see in the

logo u right here you can kind of see what it's a you can see the ring and then they had the the the fan out of the the partitions being replicated along that ring. So their logo was indicating they were using consistent hashing. So I think consistent hashing was invented at MIT in 9798. Uh but a year before that there was another paper came out on a technique called rendevous hashing and I think the the theory shows that the consistent hashing is a specialized subset of a rendevous hashing. The basic idea here

is that for every single key we we want to hash or we want to we want to assign to a partition in our database, we're going to generate multiple uh hashes for it where for each hash we're going to append like the the partition ID or the the node identifier of the different nodes we have in our cluster and then we're going to choose the one that choose the the assigned the key to a partition for for the one that has the highest hash value. So say again here's our data we want to hash we want to use the this this column

here as the partition key. So what we're going to do is take the f take the key here and we're going to hash it. Uh but we're going to concatenate the the the key value in this case a along with some representation of the node or the partition identifier like like think of just like you're literally smashing the bytes together and then you're hashing it and you're going to get a bunch of hash values come out of that. And then now what you're going to do for all the other keys, you're just going to choose

whatever the one uh the whatever the hash value that has is the highest one. And that tells you what node, what partition the key should be assigned to. And so now if I add a new key, I just do the same thing, right? And I end up with, you know, a rank order like this. And that determines where it goes. And then again, the problem we're trying to solve is if I add if I add or remove partitions or nodes in my in my my system, I don't want to have to move everything around. So the way that

basically works, if I add another node, then I just do all the hashing again. And it may be the case that some of the data will get moved, but some of the data will still be the same because it's going to be based on the ranking of the hash values uh when I run this. So in the case here of D going back here before I added node four it was on assign node two but when now when I hash D with node four it turns out node four is the is the highest rank hash value. So then I only have to move key D to to

that new partition. So this is gonna be faster lookups because it's it's it's login to go find the data you want. Whereas in in kiss and hashing it's I think it's login. I'm sorry it's it's n whereas this is login. Okay. So so the next thing we need to talk about is how we're going to make multiple copies of data and either the entire tables the the individual records or files it doesn't matter what it is. how we're going to make copies of that data and put it across multiple nodes so

that again if if one of those nodes crashes we don't have to stop the world we don't take the whole system down waiting for that that node to recover we we can keep up keep up and running so most data systems in the world that are be distributed databases meaning running on on more one or more machine or two or more machines are going to be doing basic replication so it'll still be a shared everything box running on on a single node but then they'll do replication to propagate the

changes on that that one node to another node or multiple nodes so that if that the main node primary node goes down I can just recover promote the the replicas to become the new primary. So everything we're talking here is still going to uh will be applicable to whether you're doing partition databases or nonpartition databases whether it's share nothing or share disk right you still want to do all these things. So the first question is what's the configuration of this replica replication scheme going to look like?

How are we going to then propagate changes from one node to another node? Uh when should those changes get applied and how are transactions or queries updating that data and then for me determine how to propagate those changes. So let me go through each of these. Right. So the first question is again for any piece of data who is responsible for it. Uh and where could multiple copies of that piece of data exist? And so primary replica is the most common one where for any single object in our database there'll be some some

node or partition is now considered the primary location of it. Again whether it's on shared disc or share nothing it doesn't matter. It knows that any write or any modification I want to make to that object has to go to that primary node and then the the that primary node is responsible for propagating those changes to that object to any replica that's following falling along behind it. And then when if and when the primary goes down then we run what's called leader election where we

determine what's going to be the new primary for for any any object. And this get this basically looks like a transaction as we had before. Think we have a table that says for any any node any object here's here's here's the the primary node responsible for it. So I just run a transaction on that decide how to update that atomically decide to promote a new new primary. And then this is where paxos and raft come in to do that kind of thing for two-based commit. Another choice that's less common is to

do multi- primary where this is an object can exist at any location in our distributed system and therefore it can be updated by any one of these nodes and then I got to resolve any conflicts I have if two nodes update the same object. How do I decide which which you know which uh which of these you know which which should be the latest version that successfully commit. So I said primary replica is the most common one right people running you know Postgress in in enterprise settings most Postgress instances are running on a

single box and they'll be doing something like this so all the reads and writes can go to the primary and then when transactions commit or as changes are being applied the updates get propagated to the replicas right and in some systems you can actually then run readonly queries on the replicas right if you know your your queries aren't going to update any data you can you can hand them off to the read replicas And that way you don't interfere with anything on the primary because you want

you want the p the rights to go as fast as possible. So you want to offload them from the primary if you can. But again depending on how you're propagating updates we'll talk about in a second the the the reads on the replicas might be reading stale data. And again for some applications that might be okay. What's less common is to do multi primary and this is where reads and writes can go to any node on any object. Uh and then now the nodes are responsible for communicating and coordinating with each other or through

a centralized coordinator to determine what should be which right should succeed and which rights should not succeed and if one thing gets written at the bottom you know that it wants to get propagated to the top or likewise the other way. Yes. >> Yes. >> The question is uh I said in primary replica you want to do leader election. Why would you ever want to change what the primary is? This node catches on fire, goes down, crashes. Which one is now the new primary, right? And then now

you got, say this node goes down, the two replica say they're both going to be the primary. Well, you only want one of them to win. So you need leader election for that. Yes. The question is in uh in a multi primary what's an example you would want one right to succeed on one node and not the other. Say you're trying to guarantee ordering of transactions uh serializable and you and I write to the same thing at the same time only one of them should should succeed or say we write to two things at the

same time. You write two things I write two things. So as you see all my rights or all your rights and not a mix of the two. So one of those transactions has to fail. And that's going to be the two-based locking or OCC all the stuff we talked about before. >> Yes. >> The question is should you use something like multipos? Yes. Next class. Right. >> What's that? The question is where if I'm doing GPL where I store the locks few more slides. All right. So let's let me let me switch

case safety. Let's talk about the propagation scheme and then I'll I'll get to your question. All right. K safety says basically how many replicas do I have to have in order to stay up? So if I have three copies of the data and my K safety factor is is is is uh is one meaning like I need to have at least one copy of the data live. So if two nodes go down rather than me still taking updates to update the database I say I'm not in a safe mode right now I'm going to stop the system don't take any

new updates because I don't want to make changes to my node and then have that node go down and end up losing them. So, so you can have you can specify how many machines need to be up or how many copies of data you need to have in order for the systems to stay online. All right. So, if we update data on on on on a node whether it's multi- primary or um or primary replica and again in a multi primary world you still can have replicas right every primary can have its own bunch of replicas it keeps in

sync as well. They're not they're not mutually exclusive. Now the question is if I if I update something on on the primary should I wait until the replicas acknowledge that they got those rights before I tell the outside world that your transaction has succeeded or your update has succeeded. So if you're going to wait this is called synchronous uh you know syn synchronous propagation or syn and strong consistency. The idea is that I my transaction did a bunch of updates on this node here.

That's the primary and it has a replica behind it. I'm going to propagate those changes to the replica. I'm going to tell it to flush and I have to wait until the replica comes back and says, "Yes, I got your changes and they're durable on disk. I flush them on disk." And so the primary has to wait. And then once it finishes, it sends the acknowledgement says the thing you asked me to write to disk, I wrote to disk successfully. And then then and only then do you tell the outside world your

transaction has committed. And if you have multiple replicas in different locations, they all if you want things to be, you know, very right very right very right very right very right very right very right very right very right very right very right very right very right very right very right very right very right very right very right very right very right uh strong consistency they all have to agree that this transaction is committing we'll talk about how we're going to do that next class before you tell the outside world

you committed and that way if the primary goes down uh or you know that that the changes haven't been applied to the replica yes >> question is this two-based commit two-based commit is one way to do this yes the key idea is I'm waiting for everyone to come back and say, "Yep, I got what you wanted." And before you tell the outside world, you committed. Asynchronous would be I the outside world tells me I want to commit. I can send the message to the to the replica and say, "Hey, I got this change. Go

ahead and commit the change for me." But I'm not going to wait for it to come back. I'm going to immediately tell you, say, "Yep, I got your change." Right? And then eventually this thing will flush. Of course, now there's there's a there's a brief window where like if this thing crashes and maybe this thing crashes, but I've already told you your transaction committed, then I come back and it's gone, right? Because maybe maybe I wrote to the log on this guy here, right? And it

say it's a share nothing system. The log is on the local box, but that n that node gets nuked. The log is gone and now your change, you know, didn't actually get propagated to everyone else. And you go try to read it and it's not there anymore. So the the NoSQL guys were all about this thing because they said, "Oh, we don't want to wait for transactions to commit." They didn't have really notion of transactions. Whereas if you care about, you know, really care about not

losing data, you want to do the thing at the top. You can play games about things like I'm showing only, you know, one primary, one replica, you could say, well, I have one primary and and three replicas. As long as two of my replicas come back and say they got my change, then I'm not going to wait for the third one. Right? You you could do that and try to try to you know reduce the time amount of time you have to wait. So okay um I propagation timing just basically says when do you actually uh send the the

going back here when do you actually send the changes from the primary to the replica. So you could do this continuously. So every single time you do an update in the middle of a transaction, you propagate that change to the other node. Uh and then and then that way when you go to commit, it's basically applied all the changes and just sending the commit message. Or if you do it upon commit, you basically stage all the updates on the primary and then only when that you get commit message from the from the application,

then you send all the updates you want to have applied to the to the replicas along with commit message. You have to wait longer for them to apply the changes and come back to you. But the idea here is that you don't have to ask them to abort and roll anything back. Most systems do the top one and and not the bottom one. All right. So I'll come back next class and I'll talk about active active versus active passive. Um but I want to talk about a bunch of these things that been coming up like

okay well what's the what's the architecture of the distributed system? Who's talking to what? Is there something in in the you know is there a centralized piece that can coordinate all everything that we want to do? And then this will segue into distributed control next class. So if all our transactions need to update only data on a single box that's easy to do, right? Every box can just run its own you know local uh you know local currency control. It doesn't need to coordinate

with anybody else right ignoring replica stuff. It just applies all the changes and commits and done. It's when I have to start touching data across multiple nodes especially if I have replicas and I want to make sure those guys are all agreeing that we're committing transactions together then I need a mechanism to coordinate all that right and there's two approaches. One is to use a centralized coordinator. Think of this like like a global traffic cop that has a complete understanding of all the

transactions that are running in my system at any given time and it's where I can store my locks if I want to in that in that centralized location or it can be completely decentralized and have the nodes themselves decide how they're going to you know choose when to commit. Now you still can do a leader election in a decentralized architecture because one node has to say this is what we want to do. uh but there isn't going to be a complete global view of all the transactions running in the system.

So the in a centralized architecture uh you have this sort of coordinator sitting on the side and say my query wants my transaction wants to show up and want data on these these three partitions. So I'm first going to send my lock request for the data I want to access and this can either done because I'm sending the query and this thing knows how to parse that query and break it up or you can say explicitly I want to lock data at these partitions with these within these ranges or these values or something right there's some

lock request to a coordinator up above and then now this is maintaining this lock information sends back the acknowledgement to the application that you got this you you you acquired these locks that you wanted and then now the application can send whatever queries it wants to the partition to do whatever it needed. And then now when it's going to commit, it has to go to the coordinator and says, "Hey, I want to commit my transaction. Here's what I did." The coordinator is then responsible for

communicating with the other partitions and say, "Hey, this transaction made some changes on you. Is it safe to commit this?" Again, they're all running their own local concurrent protocol to decide what what's allowed to commit or not. And then if they send back the acknowledgement that you know that that this transaction is allowed to commit then only then the coordinator can send back the response to the application that said you've allowed you're allowed to commit.

So this is how people built distributed databases back in the the 80s or 90s. Uh there was a bunch of products uh they're called in the old days they were called TP monitor or they still are called TP monitors but it stood for in the old days they stole for telecom processing monitor and then over time the acronym just got changed to be transaction processing monitor but it's basically a centralized coordinator that knows how to run distributed transactions across multiple multiple nodes and then there

was a in the 90s there was a an effort to standardize the protocol in which you can have a TP monitor communicate with the different different coordinator uh different partitions. These things called uh uh XA open XA or something. Yeah, open XA. It was like a transaction protocol that says basically do 2PL uh coordination across different devices or different different systems. You could have your TV monitor the coordinate at the top communicate with an Oracle database and a times 10 database or or a

non-stop SQL database and knew how to do distributed transactions across them and everyone was still running their own local thing. BEA was another famous one that got bought by Oracle. Uh the I know the founder of BEA the dude is amazing. He's holistic. He wrote one of the first database systems on Solaris in the 1980s at Sun. Uh Transarch was founded by actually came out of the the Andrew file system project here at CMU, the Andrew the Andrew project, right? And this was founded by uh Jeff Epinger in the

software engineering department um and got bought by IBM. I don't think it's still around. And then omit is a um is a TP monitor for running transactions on HBAS and other systems. This is not that common. What is more common is using a middleware approach. It's basically the same thing. It's just now all the queries go to this centralized thing directly. And this is responsible for routing all the queries and maintaining the lock table and sending all the requests to the different nodes as as needed. Uh so it

looks like a single database server instance into the application server but behind the scenes it's coordinating across this different different nodes right this is what Google did back in the day uh when they sharted out my my SQL before spanner they basically did the same thing this is what this is also what uh Facebook does still today right Facebook runs the largest my SQL cluster and it's basically using a middleware approach to look like a single logical database all right last slide uh decentraliz

coordinator basically the idea is that you go can start a transaction request to any node. Somehow there's a later election decide that this node is going to be responsible for coordinating everything. The application can then send send requests either to individual nodes or even or even go to the leader and let the leader route things for you. But when it comes time to commit, the leader is responsible for for interacting with the other partitions that are involved in this transaction and saying is this transaction allowed

to commit? Yes or no? and we'll talk about next class how how we're actually going to run this. All right. So, I'm going to skip federated data system next class basically it's the middleware approach but like the idea is that instead of having all the nodes on your on on the that you're talking to be the same like same database system like it's my SQL just different you know different copies of it or different instances running different nodes. I can have a in a federated database, I can have a single

uh view into uh through this middleware that then knows how to take a single query and send the the the request to whatever database server you want to connect this to. So it looks like you your database or MySQL database or Postgress database all looks like a single database system. Uh but underneath but this middleware is hiding all that from you. These are not that common. They don't work very well. Uh but this is an idea that's been around uh for a while. And this is you know this goes back to the 1990s. All right.

So, let me just quickly talk about this and this will take us to the next class. So, say now I want to run transaction that want talk data across two different nodes or different partitions. Things are easy if they're only touching one thing at a time. But as soon as I have to start touching data that is at different nodes, then this becomes problematic because now we have to do either two-phase locking or OC, whatever we talked about before. And now I have to worry about deadlocks and all the

things we talked about on a single node. I got to make this work in a distributed environment. And if they're in the same rack, then yeah, communication be kind of fast. But if I'm running across a wide area network across, you know, wide geog geographical regions like US East, US West in AWS, then this is this is hard. So that's what we'll come off next class. We'll talk about how we actually, you know, how we do distributed OTP systems and distributed OLA systems to do joins across different nodes. Uh but

this everything we talk about today is the foundation of building a initial distributed native system. Okay, any questions in the back? Yes. >> Say it again. >> Is there any existing implementation of federal database? So, Trino or Presto will kind of give you this now with with using connectors. Uh, Postgress farm data wrappers are essentially kind of doing the same thing now too, right? The problem is the what you want to do is you you is a query shows up and then whatever the middleware system they

would know oh you want to touch data at this database system and you have to then carve off whatever part of the query that that needs to run in that system and try to push down predicates projections try to send down a query request that's specialized to that whatever the target data system to do often times they can't do that and it's usually like a select star query to suck all the data up that that's the big challenge there right because you end up building the lowest common denominator

for a wide variety of systems you would support. Okay, in the back. Yes. >> Question. Aren't parallel datas same as shared databases? Yes. Um and you could argue also too that like a parallel database where you're like a NAS or a storage attack network like is that the same thing? Sort of. Yes. But like we'll say next class you can actually have different architectures where like the right ahead log gets distributed to the shared disc and you still then coordinate across across them. It's

slightly different but at a high level yes like if I have a single box that has like 20 CPU sockets in it is that the same thing as a sha database at a high level yes. But some architecture decisions you make can be different. Okay. All right guys have a good holiday. See you on Monday next week. Money clips acquaint flow with the brain. Get the fortune Maintain a straight flow with the drink.

