[music] [music] I'm still associant. [music] [music] So, he's gone today. He should be back uh on on Wednesday for the last class. Um all right. So, lot to cover. Again, as a reminder, everything I'm talking about today is fair game on the on the final exam. Obviously, since you know, we're kind of covered at this at the last minute. We can't go to, you know, can't ask you too many too many details, but some of the questions are on the the homework six, which is coming due this

Wednesday. Project four is also coming due this Wednesday as well. Sorry, Sunday. both are due on Sunday. And oh, there's also the uh for the project four, the Saturday office hours are coming up this Saturday on the 6th. I'll post that on on Piaza. That'll be 6th fifth floor in gates from 3:00 to 5:00. And as always, post your questions on Piaza uh before. Uh the final exam, again, it's Thursday, December 11th. It's going to be over in the student center in the giant auditorium. Uh there

is a final study guide. I'm finishing up also with the practice final exam. I'll post that tonight. Um, and then on next class on Wednesday will be the sort of a quick overview of of the the material we've covered so far that'll be uh applicable to on the final exam. And I'll go over some of the um the questions people had about you know strict QPL and some of the other things that come up along the during the lectures but having time to go re revisit. I'll cover those again on on

Wednesday. And again, if you're interested in this kind of stuff and get around for next semester, I want to be a TA, please sign up here. So, any questions about the final exam, homework six, or project four. >> What's the maximum bonus you get? >> What's the question is, what's the maximum bonus you get for project four? Should be the same as the other ones? I think 25. Yeah, 25, >> but I'll double check it. It should be the same. Other [snorts] questions?

All right. And then the um for the the the last two weeks of the semester, uh we have two remaining speakers. So the snowflake guys are giving a talk tonight or today at 4:30 after class. That should be not 12 p.m. It should be 4:30. Both of these are are at 4:30, not 12 p.m. Sorry. Uh so that'll be the Polaris is the open source reimplication of of the iceberg catalog API. Remember data bricks, sorry, snowflake tried to buy the iceberg people called a company called tabular for 600 million. Data bricks

came in and kicked their knees out and bought them for $1 billion. So then uh Snowflake decided to write their own and that's what Apache Polaris is. So they'll be they'll be talking today again at 4:30, not 12 p.m. And then next week we have uh the guys from Apache Fluence. Again, I don't really know a lot about the system, but they've asked to give a talk and they'll be giving a talk about what they're building as well. Okay. [snorts] All right. So, last class we talked

about distributed databases. Um, and sort of a quick introduction to the the key ideas and key concepts behind them, right? We spend most of our time talking about the difference between shared nothing and shared shared disk architectures. Shared nothing is when every single node has sort of some some partition or piece of of of the database um and in its local disk. And anytime you want to communicate between the nodes, you're sort of going through regular TCIP typically connections. You can do UDP.

Then shared disc is where the primary storage location of the database was a external storage system like an Amazon S3 or GCS or distributed file system and then all the the databases would retrieve pages retrieve data from that shared storage and then bring them into it it's their own local memory. [snorts] We talk about how to do partitioning on the data to split it up into disjoint subsets or usually disjoint subsets right and this is the technique called horizontal partitioning. People say

sharding. It's essentially the same idea. And you can usually, you know, pick a um you would pick a a set of keys that you would then hash or use the generate the ranges on. So you divide things up in such a way that when queries run all the data they need is on a single uh on a single node or single partition. But we'll see later today how we're going to handle that when we want to do joins and the data is not partitioned in a way that we want for our join and how we how we're going to

handle uh in that in our system. Talk about how to do replication. So primary replica, multi- primary, the two basic setups and then transaction coordination. We talked about having a centralized coordinator either as an external thirdparty thing on the side like a TP monitor or a middleware sitting in the in in between the application and the database system that is coordinating the transactions or you have a decentralized model where all the nodes themselves are trying to decide how to uh whether transactions are

allowed to commit. We'll spend more we'll spend more on that topic today. [snorts] So today's class again I'm trying to condense down the two major concepts you need to be aware of in distributed systems but we're going to distinguish sort of the first half of the lecture will be on OLTP uh systems and the second half will be on OLAP systems and I think we we talked about this earlier in the semester the way to think about OTP is this is like what most websites are when you when you buy things and and

place orders or do comments on Reddit or or hackernews right this is where you're the trans the application is making small number of updates uh at a time within transactions and you want this to run as fast as possible because again this is something that exposed to to humans or other machines and then analytical workloads is where we would do exploratory analysis of the data to extrapolate new knowledge from the data we've already collected from a OTP system so in this environment we're running long running

queries that can take seconds or even minutes or hours that will do a bunch of joins and uh try to aggregate a bunch of information together right so in the world we want transactions to run less than 50 milliseconds in a OLAP system, you know, less than a second is usually good enough, right, for most things. So, as I said, we're going to first talk about stuff and then we'll talk about uh OLAP stuff. And again, it's not to say that that these things are completely, you know, mutually exclusive to each other. Like

if I'm building a a distributed transactional database system, OTB database system, I may have to do joins in it and therefore I'm going to need to do my different distributed join algorithms, right? But it may not be the main thing I'm going to focus in my in my system. And likewise in a uh in an analytical system, I may I still want to have transactions and I still need to use a consistency protocol, atomic commit protocol, make sure this all works. Uh but it's not the thing I'm

trying to optimize for. Right? So again, these are these whether or not you spend all your effort in when you engineer a system to focus on one of these two these two two category things depends on what the workload you're trying to target. And this again there's a lot to cover here. I'm trying to condense what would been you know if we had more faculty at CMU we could teach a whole course on distributed databases try to condense down the main things you need to understand so that when you got in the

real world to be exposed to these concepts exposed to these topics you may not be an expert in it but you just be aware of it and some of the design decisions that you have to make when you start evaluating systems or try to build your own. Okay. So remember that last class we talked about how the whole goal of a distributed database system is that we want it to appear to the application as if as if it's a single logical database. So again, ideally the same query I could run on a single node Postgress database

instance uh could run if I had a sharded or partitioned or uh distributed system, right? But then now we got to worry about if now my data is broken up across or or is is resides in a bunch of these different nodes, whether it's shared disk or a shared nothing system. When we start making changes to data that maybe reside on different nodes and we want to go commit a transaction, how are we going to make sure that all the same asset properties we had when we were doing transactions on a single node

system uh still are still going to work for us in a distributed environment. Right? Again, distributed doesn't mean it doesn't mean it's a completely radical way of thinking about how to build the system. It's just doing all the same stuff we were doing before, but now just in hard mode because we have to worry about a bunch of things we didn't worry about before when we were on a single node. So say we want to do a commit across for a transaction that touches multiple nodes, but one of those

nodes goes down. What should happen to that transaction? What happens if the messages that we're sending for commit transaction show up late or somehow get dropped along the way because a weird network hiccup? What should happen? Right? And then what happens if we are doing a large distributed transaction and like you know 100 machines uh should we wait for every single one to agree that we should commit or can we uh can we look at less something less than that right so one important assumption we're going

to make throughout this lecture today is that actually going off the real world you should make this assumption as well is that we're going to assume all the nodes that are participating in our distributed AB system are controlled followed by us and therefore are well behaved. Well behaved in quotes. Obviously if like the harbor crashes that's you know that's we can't prevent that. Well, what what we mean is that it's not like we're worried about someone running a malicious version of

our database system. Uh so that when we go to commit a transaction, they start messing around with us and causing you know weird states, right? So we assume that we control everything. Uh even if we don't control the hardware, we're at least controlling the software and that if a node tells us, yeah, let's go ahead and commit, they're not going to like change their mind or try to try to screw around with the decisions that are being made in our system, right? What what kind of protocol would you

want to use if you don't trust the other nodes? Byzantine. Yes. So if you don't trust the other nodes and you assume they could be malicious actors, you need what is called a Byzantine fault tolerant protocol, the BFT protocol, right? If you know what I'm sure everyone heard of blockchains, but this is basically how blockchains work. Blockchains are just running transactions like we normally would in our in our beautiful database system, except those guys don't trust the other nodes. So therefore they have

to run a BFT protocol to get everyone to to majority to agree that this is what's going to happen, right? And they use like the Merkel tree stuff which I'm not going to talk about. They they use a immutable ledger, immutable redhead log to keep track of here's all the changes that that get made and then you can't go back and reverse things, right? They do all this extra stuff because they're, you know, it's bunch of randos and crypto boy bros mining things and you can't trust them, right?

You never want to do this with a in a in a real system running real transactions that isn't crypto, right? There there really isn't a good practical use case for blockchains other than than crypto. Like if you're moneyaundering stuff, then you want to use that. But like Amazon's not going to run off this, right? Blockchain, any real system is not going to run on blockchain because it's going to be five to 10x slower than the stuff we're talking about today. Okay? So again, if you remember only two

things from this class, never use MAPAP in your data system and then don't use blockchain databases, right? Uh use use the transactional stuff we'll talk about today because we're already be facing the struggling with the speed of light issues to do our atomic commit protocols. We'll see in a second. And now I got to run a bunch of BFT stuff for it. You know, it's a waste. All right. So how are we going to make sure that everyone can agree that in our distributed database when we want to

commit that we can all go ahead and agree that we're going to commit. So this is what's been called atomic commit protocol. If you're coming from the distributed systems world, they would call this a consensus protocol. They're basic they're the they are the same thing, right? Um and in the distributive systems world, they would call these things state machines. The thing that we care about is the order in which transactions are going to get committed. Guess what? That's that's the state of

the system. It's the same thing. So we're going to use our atomic commit protocol to decide which what is the order that transactions will be will be allowed to commit. And then once we know they've been committed, we want to write them out in such a way a ledger or log so that we recorded that this is the order that they were then committed. So that if anybody comes back and tries to read uh you know to replay that those transactions in that same order, you know, we'd be guaranteed to put it back

in the same state. Okay. And we're going to want to do this use our atomic compet no matter how the database is divided split across the nodes in our system. So whether a piece of data has been replicated across multiple machines or it's been partitioned and there's only one location of that data in our distributed system cluster uh we're still going to run this atomic commit protocol. So the very first one that uh in that that people sort of developed in this to solve this problem was is two-phase

commit. Who here has heard of two-phase commit? All right, less than half. And then they'll have one problem. We'll see in a second. And then um there was a stonebreaker, the guy invented postgress came up with another version called three-phase commit to solve some of the problems that two-phase commit does, but that's overly complicated. So nobody does three-phase commit. There's a four-phase commit from Microsoft uh that for specialized hardware, but again, that's a that's a research system, not a

real system. But the the problem we're trying to solve is basically get everyone to agree that this thing is when we say transactions allowed to commit that we can go ahead and commit and then we don't have to ideally not to block the entire system until everyone agrees. Two-phase commits going to have that problem. But the the newer protocols like Paxos that probably everyone is familiar with uh they're going to get around this because they'll take majorities. So two-pace commit will

block everybody to to everyone agrees to commit. There's a protocol developed at MIT called viewstamped uh replication that came out in 1988. This predates Paxos by a year but it's bas essentially the same solving the same problem. Paxos came out in ' 89. Um again solves the same things. Zab is the Zookeeper atomic broker protocol that's only used in Zookeeper. And then Raft is another one probably everyone familiar with as well. uh it's getting it's a it's a simplification simplification of Paxos

in a certain way but it's designed to be more easily understand but a high level they're all the same thing right so we're going to focus on these two because in databases most systems are going to do two-based commit and then a lot of a lot of them are also going be doing paxels as well sometimes they'll do both in a single system um raph again if you if you understand paxos you'll be able to understand raph and again this is not a distributed systems class if you taken uh was it 440 They cover this

as well, but we'll go to the high level and talk about the things we care about in our databases. Right? So, two-phase commit is is again one the first one was developed. It's originally attributed to to Jim Gray, the guy that met at two phase locking and a bunch of other stuff. He won the Tory award in databases in the in the 1990s. Um, but in interviews with him, he says that he got the idea from some some Italian programmer in the 1970s. And when they talked to that guy, he said, "Oh, it's

actually based on um how people did contract law on pencil and paper." So it's an application of ideas that that were in the physical world applied to the the digital world with databases. All right. All right. So, our atomic pro protocol again the idea is that we want to get coordinate across multiple nodes or resources in our system that a transaction is allowed to commit and that everyone's going to agree at the same time that this transaction has successfully committed or a batch of

transactions, right? And you can sort of think the the the state machine for a transaction we're trying to follow is like this. So while transaction is executing queries and reading data or modifying modifying the database it's in the working state and then it says all right I'm done my changes I want to go ahead and commit right then the application sends a commit request and then there's some work to be done to figure out should we allow this guy to this transaction to commit or is it not

allowed to commit and then we we get everyone to agree that it can't commit and we would abort and roll back these changes [snorts] and then the property of our commit protocol is that once we decide that this transaction has successfully committed that we can't revert that that decision like once all the nodes agree that this transaction is allowed to commit one of them can't come back said I can't I can't can't I changed my mind right and then when we finally reached the end state either committed or

aborted everyone is simultaneously in agreement that this is the right thing to happen and this is the current state of the system so we're going to assume there has to be uh we assume a livveness property meaning that there's always going to be some number of nodes available for us to to keep making forward progress in our in our system. Now, it doesn't mean that transactions will be allowed to commit. It may be the case that we keep losing nodes and before we can everyone agree that we can commit and transactions keep

getting aborted, but it's still moving forward in time, right? All right. So, let's look at the basic one two-phase commit. So assume the application server has commit did some read and write operations on these these these nodes here in our in our distributed data system and then it's going to go to this first one here. I'm not going to say how it decides to do that but we'll cover that in a second but assume there's like a leader election right this says this is the node that's be in charge of of

committing my transaction. So under a two-phase commit, you would call this this node here the coordinator because it's going to be responsible for coordinating the commit process for this transaction across the other nodes. And then the other nodes would be the participants and assume these are the nodes that the applica the the transaction read or wrote data from while it was it was running. So you could have like a thousand nodes in your cluster, although that's rare for for transactional systems, but I only need

to run two-based commit on the ones that I've uh I've interacted with. So as it as as it sounds two biz commit has two phases. So in the first phase you send up a prepare message to all the nodes and say hey this transaction here with this ID uh that's uniquely identifies that it wants to commit and then all the nodes will decide on their own whether it this transaction is allowed to commit right they have to be aware you know they have to know what it did and they can run whatever uh you know validation

process they want to run based on what concurrency protocol they're using to determine whe that that transaction is allowed to commit and then they send back an acknowledgement they send back an okay right they're voting it So we want to commit the transaction and then once the coordinator gets the acknowledgement back from all of the the the nodes that it sent out the the first message to then it can go ahead and switch to the second phase the commit phase where now it sends to everyone

saying hey guess what everyone said we're going to commit this go ahead and commit it then they come back and say okay we did commit it and then and only then under the sort of strict definition of two-phase commit once you get back the acknowledgement from all the nodes participating in this transaction uh in the second phase then you're allowed to tell the application your transaction has committed right you're telling the outside world that this this this thing has committed successfully

one thing I'm not showing here is that we're actually going to be writing all the messages we're passing around between the the coordinator and the participants we're going to be storing them in the write ahead log as well right could either be in the right ahead log with the regular data or it could be a separate write ahead log used for transactional uh coordination stuff But all these nodes will be recording on disk what their votes are and what the outcomes are. So that when we crash and

come back, we go look in that log and figure out what was I doing at the moment that crashed including what if I was doing uh you know a two-phase commit process across multiple nodes. [snorts] All right would be the abort case. Same thing I get a commit message. First phase you send out the the the pair message to everyone. Say the first guy comes back at the bottom here. He says okay yeah we can go and commit this. But the second one in the middle, for whatever reason, it decides this transaction is not allowed to commit.

Like say there's like an integrity constraint violation or whatever. Um, and so it sends back the abort message. [snorts] So as soon as the the the abort message come uh shows up from any one of the participant nodes, then we automatically switch into the prepare or the abort phase, the second phase. So we're not even going to wait for the node two to come back with its vote because once we get one abort because everyone has to agree that this transaction is allowed to commit. Once we get one denial vote, then we switch

into the second phase. So we send out the uh the abort message everyone in the second phase and then we also immediately tell the application that the transaction has aborted. So we don't need to wait to find out whether the everyone's going to you know finally commit this and or finally abort and roll back all the changes. Soon as we get one you know notification that this transaction can't complete we send back the abort message immediately to the the application. We saw this before like when um on a

single node when a transaction aborted because like you know there was a deadlock or something like that we would then immediately send back the response to the application the transaction has aborted and then later on we go ahead and clean things up with the CLRs to reverse things in our log. the application doesn't need to wait for that cleanup process and then eventually they all come back and say yes we we this transaction has has successfully been aborted and at that point again there should be no

artifacts or no you know pending changes for that transaction on any of the nodes >> yes question is what happens when one node dies boom next slide so we send a commit message goes first first prepare messages go out. Then the first two guys, the the top and the bottom, they smack. Okay, the second one dies. This is the scenario you want, right? So again, under two-phase commit, all the nodes have to agree that this transaction is allowed to commit. So that means the coordinator has to wait

for some amount of time to find out what happened with this this the node in the middle here. And again, if it crashes completely, then if you're if you're pinging it on the network, you you won't get a response. you'll know that it's dead. But it may be the case that the the database system software itself is bogged down for some reason. Like if it's written in Java and the JVM uh the the garbage collector in the JVM fires up, it may do like a 30 secondond pause where again you're not getting response

from the database server software itself, but if you ping the node, it's going to come back and say it's alive, right? So it's really about like you know sometimes there'll also be heartbeats in these systems to send like hey are you alive and can't be a ping because the the ping's done at the harbor level you got to go up the upper layers and actually touch touch the application. So in this case here we have to wait. The coordinator has to wait. At some point it's there's a

timeout and it says all right well node 3 is not not coming back. It doesn't want to talk to me. So at that point I automatically switch into the abort phase. All right. And I send back the the abort message to the application server. And eventually these guys will come back and say we we've aborted as well. >> Yes. The question is can can the application abort before when? Sorry. [snorts] >> The question is like going back here like I I time out. I see I can't send it. When do I send the the abort message

back? You can send it before and after. It doesn't matter. Typically, you want to send it sooner to the application first because why wait, right? Because you're not there's nothing, you know, there's it's not like they're blocked waiting for well, they they're blocked and waiting for the response from the commit request. So, if you can free them up and let them do whatever, you know, set up the prepare the retry, right? Then they can go ahead and do that. But you know it's we're talking microsconds

nconds difference between the two because again you're not going to wait for these guys to acknowledge that they've aborted right you just immediately tell them the outside world you abort it. So whether you do one versus the other the correctness isn't there's not a correctness issue. What's the point? >> The question is what's the point of last okay for note like um like what's why does the the node one need to wait for it or why do they need to send it back?

>> So >> the question is why why even bother sending back the acknowledgement that we've successfully aborted just for people to record every step of the process what happened. So these nodes record in their log, hey, we got an abort message for this transaction. The coordinator is going to record in its in its uh in its own log that it got back the acknowledgement for that abort message. Because if the coordinator crashes, which cover the next slide, and I come back, I got to know what was I

doing at the time. I don't know whether or not these guys have been told this transaction has been aborted or not, unless I get back the acknowledgement. So we're being overly cautious here. >> Yes. So it's >> so the question is what happens here? So if I if I go everyone says we're going to go ahead and commit and then all of a sudden like one of these nodes come back on the on the second phase and says no. Right? In that case that's considered a failure on that node. the transaction is

still committed because everyone agreed since you got past the first phase, everyone agreed that this transaction has is is going to commit. So if the second phase does something weird like doesn't send back a response or sends back an okay, which it shouldn't, but it might because some some bug then that node is considered faulty and therefore it should crash. The transaction is still committed and then the system has to then bring up another node to replace it and then replay the log to know that

that transaction has successfully committed. Yeah. So see his question is if one guy goes down during the commit phase, do we still tell tell the outside world that you committed? Yes. Okay. So here all right. So I've already said this, but again we basically need to record in our log all the the the inbound outbound messages we have for every step along the way, right? And just like in in [snorts] the write ahead log, ideally I want to make sure I flush those messages to disk before I send

out, you know, any acknowledgement. If I like I I get the inbound message. I'm going to say, "Hey, I'm going to send an outbound message that like I'm okay with voting this, I want to flush that before maybe I send it out, uh before I can say my transactions fully committed." Most systems don't do that, right? There's a small window. Again, you could potentially lose things. Uh, but it's not like you're going to lose um it's not like you're going to, you know,

would lose the changes for a transaction potentially because someone's still going to be recording, you know, here's all the here's all the events that occurred. Um, and so therefore, like it just makes recovery longer and that's why most systems do this optimization, right? [snorts] So now if I crash, if a transaction was in the prepared state on my node when I wake up, then I got to go talk to the coordinator say, "Hey, I I I'm new to the game or I crashed and came back.

What happened to this guy?" And the coordinator tell what happened. Um if the transaction just was still actively running and didn't actually begin the commit process, then you know should be aborted, right? Um but then if the coordinator crashes then you basically have to figure out did everyone agree that this transaction is allowed to commit and did we send any outbound messages to the application that committed. Actually that one you can't check but like if everyone agreed that

the thing is committed then the transactions considered committed and you may not even get the acknowledgement to the application but everyone agreed that the transaction committed. So you need to make sure that actually happens. So I think I already said this if the if the the coordinator crashes right the participants basically figure out what the what should happen and the simplest thing to do is just say coordinator crashes the transaction gets aborted and then you elect a new coordinator if

necessary. Uh if you want to be kind of clever you could then get them to reorganize themselves and try to figure out whether it's the transaction allowed to commit but most systems don't do that. And again while you're doing this reorganization process you can't commit any other transactions because you need to find out what whether the the preceding transaction has successfully committed or not right so that I know that I'm always moving forward in time in my state machine. So if one

participant goes down and I can figure out how to be clever and try to reorganize things and allow the transaction to commit may not be worth it because I'm blocking all other transactions from committing. If the participant crashes, then the we just assume that the the the coordinator assumed the participant was going to vote for an abort um assuming, you know, we're in the still in the first phase. And then we just, you know, then we just abort the transaction because there's no guarantee that the changes that they

were they were going to make landed correctly on that other other the the participant. So, we can't allow the transaction commit. All right. All right. So, there's two ways to make this a little faster. I mean, I've already talked about one where you don't log everything um uh on disk, right? That's an obvious one, but you can you can do two slight modifications. One is very common, one is not that common. So early pair voting basically means that if I know that the the query I'm going to be executing on a

node is the last query I'm ever going to be executing for that transaction. Then when I send my query request message I also send along or piggyback on that message. Hey by the way I'm going to go ahead and commit after this query. So give me back your vote for two-phase commit. Right? This assumes that your application can expose in some way the logic that this is the last query for my transaction and because you don't want to you know this can't be like a guess. You can't say oh I'm going to run a

query and go ahead and commit and then come back with another query. You have to say I'm definitely done running this. So you can do that with store procedures where you have all the logic running inside the application logic running inside the data server. I think of like a RPC call. Okay. Okay. So that that's pretty rare. What's more common is to do uh early acknowledgement and basically the um when I go when I go to commit transaction once the coordinator gets the acknowledgement from the all the

participants that the transaction is about to commit rather than waiting for the the second round trip for the second phase prepare or the commit phase I immediately send back the acknowledgement that the transactions committed. So it looks like this commit request shows up. I do the first round prepare everyone votes. Okay. And again at this point here with early if I run the regular two-phase commit protocol I got to then switch in the second phase do another round trip and then once everyone agrees that this thing's

committed then send back the acknowledgement. But with early early acknowledgement once I get back from the first phase that everyone agrees that this transaction is going to commit then I can tell the application they've committed right and the idea is again that like the likelihood that I'm going to fail and not be able to record my transaction is is low assuming I'm logging things in appropriate manner. Right. But I still have to run the the the second phase and I can't commit any

other transaction until this transaction commits. So two-phase commit was used in some of the first distributed databases in the 19 late 1970s early 1980s. Um but again it has this problem that like again if one of the nodes goes down during my transaction I have to stall the entire system until that node recovers and then we we then we can then continue running right so the with paxos and raft and viewstamp replication solve is the ability to not require a all participants to acknowledge that a transaction is

committed and you only require a majority right So this gives you the guarantee that even if some of the nodes go down, you can still make forward progress as long as you have a majority of of the nodes agree that a transaction is allowed to commit. So view state replication was was the first one that was provably correct to be resilient for uh in asynchronous networks. Um and then Paxos came out a year later. Who few here has read the Paxos paper? What do you think? >> It's a wild ride. Yeah.

>> So go read it tonight. You will not find any other paper written like this in computer science. So it's written by Leslie Lampport. He run the Tory award I don't know seven years ago or so uh for you know seminal work in distributed systems. Um he's at Microsoft research now. The paper he originally wrote it in '89 but it isn't like a computer science paper like describing algorithms. It's written as if he's an archaeologist discovering this ancient Greek tribe on

the island of Paxos and it it talked about how they would do voting in a in an early de democratic society by writing on stone tablets throwing them into a hole and then other people in the village or the town would come look to the hole and pull out the tablets and look look at what happened. Right? So you can't take this paper and actually implement anything from it. Right? It's just inscrutable. It's it's hilarious. It's it's as you said it's it's a lot very challenging. Um so the story goes

he wrote this paper in '89. It got rejected uh by you know what whatever the the the peerreview committee that was he submitted to the conference he submitted to and then he put it in the put it like in in his in his filing cabinet and didn't touch it for like years and then a bunch of people were writing other papers that were kind of dancing around trying to solve roughly the same idea that Paxos had already solved. So then he pulled it out and dusted it off and then resubmitted it. So if you go like in read read the paper

here, there's this little gray box blurb that talks about how this this submission was recently discovered behind a filing cabinet in the in the the TOCS editorial office. Despite its age, the editor-in chief thought it would be great would be worth public publishing, right? Because this is the reissue for Leslie Lamport after he he he uh you know after it got rejected, right? And so if you go to Leslie Lampart's website, he's got this like chron chronology that talks about all his like his papers and what he was like

where he was living, who he was like dating or what he was eating for every single one of these papers. So for the pax of his paper, he talks about how he submitted it. He thought it was, you know, a genius work of art and the the the the re reviewing committee, they were all idiots and they couldn't see his brilliance of it. Right? So I when I was in grad school, I I presented this paper to my distributed systems class and I said basically the same thing. Oh, this paper is a work of art. you know,

those those reviewers were all stupid for rejecting it. Turns out though, the professor in the class for the class was one of the reviewers for it, Maurice Hurley. He used to hear be at CMU and now he's at Brown. And he says, which I believe him, not Leslie Lampard's uh retelling, he said that they were okay with all this archaeology stuff, but they just wanted him to add an appendix with the algorithm to explain how to actually implement this thing. >> And Leslie Lampart refused to make any

change because he thought it was it was pristine or thought it was it was perfect the way it was submitted. So that's why it was rejected. All right. Um and then again you can't read this. You can't implement anything. Then he did a follow-up paper called Paxus made simple. That one is not simple either. That one you can't understand. The best paper to read understand Paxos is uh Paxos made live from Google. It's like 2004 because they implemented this in their chubby lock service and a bunch

bunch of other things right. So the thing to understand about between paxos and two-phase commit two-phase commit is a degenerative case of paxos and there's a paper in 2006 from Leslie Lamport the author of paxos and Jim Gray the guy that you know did early two-phase commit work where they prove that two-phase commit is just a subset of paxos and raph and and raph came out later but they're all basically the same thing right the key idea here is that in in paxos is that we only need a majority of participants to agree that

a transaction is allowed a commit uh rather than a a unanimous decision as you would in twobased commit. All right, good. So it looks like this same as setup before I have four nodes. My application says I wanted to commit under Paxos. They don't call them coordinators participants. They're going to call them proposers and acptors. There's a third category of nodes in Pexos called learners, which are basically things that observe the changes to the state machine or the commit order log, but aren't allowed to

to vote. But we we don't care about that. It's, you know, it's it's just an add-on, right? So, all right. So, now the same thing. We're going to send a in the first round, we're going to send our post message to all the nodes, and they're all going to vote for whether transactions allowed to commit, right? And and if they all agree, if a majority agrees, then we go and do this. So let's say the case though the setup we had before where the middle guy dies while this transaction runs. So the top

two sorry the bottom one and the top one say yes we can go ahead and agree to commit this transaction. So under paxos this is still allowed now to proceed and do the commit because a majority agrees that this transaction is allowed to commit. So two out of three right. So then we go ahead and agree this transaction is allowed to commit. And then once all they all come back say yeah we got it. Then we send back the the acknowledgement to the application. Now when the when that the middle guy who crashed comes back they again they

have to go look at the log and go figure out what what what they missed or if I can fail over to a replica of this of this node then it has to then learn that this thing has been successfully committed. Right? So there's an extra step to reconcile the the the state machine when there's failure and again because we assuming that our that our nodes are not malicious actors that they read the log and they'll do what the log says rather than like I'm not going to do that and throw things away and end up with

inconsistent state across the nodes. >> The question is if a if if if this guy says abort yes >> it's still coming. >> Yes. Uh see so [sighs] [snorts] uh yeah so if if sorry if if you're using Paxos to commit transactions yes if one guy says abort and then then you have to abort because again to your point there can be integrity for other types of things you want to use Paxos for like leader election then you you you ignore them but yeah so some things yes some things no

>> [snorts] >> The question is um uh taxes would not be suitable because like so the idea is that like I still have to wait for this guy to come back to say what happened right but if there's a timeout like the same as two days commit then I don't have to if if I get a majority agree that the thing's allowed to commit then that's enough for me right and then this thing has to then deal with So the question is what if it dies and comes back and should have been aborted.

So how to say this the [snorts] depending what kio protocol you'd want to do like if it's two-phase locking you would you would do all your integrity checks as the thing's running or you do all your locking checks as things running like with OC the validation step like that would be you'd have to figure that out but then the like if this is the only copy node three is the only copy of the data you have and therefore this is the only source in which you you could figure out where this transaction

allowed to commit then you're going to have you're going to have this problem right so assume that there could be a replica that also could be involved in the in the process like a learner to decide that this thing would allow >> the question is MCC and pass will not be good I'm not not saying that at all I'm saying that uh assume that if not it's not not single version single copy like if node 3 is the only location for for tupil a if that thing goes down then my my system's host

I'm assuming, >> right? So, I'm Yes. What I'm saying though is like the in order to make sure you don't have like integrity constraint violations that you can't reverse later on. I either have to do them while the transaction is running or I have to have a replica be able to be involved and decide whether this transaction is allowed to commit or not. >> Question back. It can't. So it can't question is if no three comes back and disagrees. It can't, >> right? Because we assume these are these

are nonmalicious actors. So they they have to they will do whatever the log tells them to do when they come back up. >> Yes. The question is if if if the commit process includes checking integrity constraints uh then this devol this devolves into uh two-phase commit because I have to wait for everyone to agree that some um yeah so again Like if you're running transactions that could cause integrity violations, you have to know that before you before you go ahead in the commit process because otherwise you can't. But

if it's like later election, I don't there's no there's not going to be any integrity violations. Replication again the assuming non-malicious actors that the replicas are going to are going to mirror the state of whatever they're replicating. They have to question is the statement is sharding more problematic. No, because >> sharded data. >> Yeah. So statement is with sharded data you could have integrity violations more easily. No, it doesn't matter if it's

sharded a single node like not null is not null whether it's you know one node or multiple nodes. But I'm saying you would check those things while the transaction is making the changes. >> Yeah. think you know if you start doing okay I'm go do reconnaissance transactions like [snorts] the way Dino does transactions is like you run all the queries you don't actually do any changes it's sort of like that repeating that scan we did to avoid phantoms so you run all the queries uh record what

they're going to do at that point you check to see whether they have any integrity violations but you didn't actually make any changes so I just know like I'm trying to insert something and can't be null and I try to insert something null so you would do that before it runs then you go to commit and then that's when you apply all the changes and therefore you don't you won't have any integrity chain violations because you check beforehand. But whether or not you're running these

queries one at a time or in a batch, you you would check these things as they're running. >> The qu the question is um if I try to insert something and then it would duplicate the value, I still have the constraint violation. So again, that's if you're doing like phantom checks. Well, hold up. like they're still doing two phase locking. You're still doing all the other sort of high level things we so mean inserting you wouldn't take locks on assert but you like um how do I say this

again the you don't have to wait for Pax says you're not going to wait for everyone to come back you have to wait for everything. Yeah, this is hard. Okay, trying to think of a concrete example how this would work. Um, [snorts] let me follow on this next week or sorry, next next class. Um, just in general assume that by the time you go to commit, everyone has to agree that this this is allowed to happen. So you don't try to like undo certain things. Okay. All right. So let me just plow through

this again. If you take a distributed system class, this is nothing new. Basically you have these proposers. They say I want to commit and then they all agree but then at any time someone says hey I want to propose a new transaction. The way paxos works you ensure that you have liess property. You're always moving forward in time. Soon as somebody else says I want to go to commit a new transaction before the second one first one has finished then immediately you you the the acceptors can't allow the

transaction commit because they've learned about a new one. So they reject it and say you told us about committing transaction N but we we now know about N plus one so we can't commit you right and then you go agree this other one and then they commit say yes and then the bottom guy has to then resubmit the transaction to get committed again it's basically again there's avoiding this blocking forever you allow transactions to always move forward in time of course is now problematic if you have proposers

clobbering each other all the time try to commit new transactions then you never get any work done right so this is where multiplexes comes in uh and this is from this is from Google and basically you just do leader election which is another transaction on the state of the system who's the leader and the leader is only allowed to commit transactions or propose that we commit transactions and anytime the leader fails then you just run leader election again and elect a new one. So they're

doing multiple rounds of Paxos to both commit transactions and decide who's the leader within a you know within a quorum. So, and then and the how long you're going to wait for the how long the releases last depends on the implementation. I think Spanner is 10 seconds. Uh cockroach is like five minutes. Uh Tidb is 10 15 seconds. I I forget what Yugabyte is. Uh but like different systems do different things. [snorts] >> Yes. >> The question is why do you need periodically renew the leader? Because

how do I know it's alive? Right. And again, I can the idea is like if I if I'm doing leader election all the time over and over again, then like I'm I'm doing leader election instead of committing transactions. But then if I don't do it that often, then I may end up with, you know, the thing crashes and it takes me a while to then decide here's the new leader and I'm stalling transactions. So that happens. You basically again paxus allows to avoid uh you know when the leader goes down

you have now two two nodes say I want to be the leader and then you you do leader election decide which one can be the leader and it's get sort of like going back here it's this clobbering thing so like say the saying I want to be the leader but the idea is that soon as I I see a new new proposal from another another node and that I throw away any other outstanding proposals. So it's ideally eventually somebody will be able to get in commit and then they become the new leader. So you just do like sort of

simple exponential backoff. If I try to propose something and I get denied because somebody else proposed something, then I'll wait 50 milliseconds and then 100 millconds. So and that way eventually someone will commit. Again, they're not malicious. They're all trying to do, you know, they're all trying to they're trying, you know, work together on this. You just need a quick and easy way to get them to back off and not collaborate each other. [snorts] All right. So again, the the

main takeaways to understand from Paxos, two-based commit, and and RAPH, again, they're all essentially the same thing. Um, it's just in two-based kit, you have to block the coordinator until everyone uh until everyone comes back or, you know, can respond or or a timeout. And if if one node goes down, then the transaction can't commit. In Paxos, it's non-blocking as long as the majority are alive. And then in Raft, it's basically the same thing, but the the way they do a leader election is is based on who has

the most up-to-date version of the log. Uh, and therefore, it's in the best state to become the leader. But at a high level, it basically works the same way. Instead of calling learners, they call them followers, right? But the again high level, it's the same thing. [snorts] All right? So, we have like 30 minutes. Yeah. Let me let me let's keep let's keep going. Uh I want to get to distributed joins as well. All right. And then we we if we run out of time, we can we can pick up on on Wednesday at

the end. All right. So the atomic commit protocol either two-phase commit, paxos or raft will provide us the guarantee that when a transaction goes ahead and commits and everyone agrees that it commits then it's committed right. Um but the challenge is going to be what happens when there's failures and the the database system ends up in this uh in this state where the nodes can can maybe not potentially communicate with each other and we need to know what's you know what guarantees can we can we

provide of whether the system can still be considered alive and actually running queries and running transactions right so this this cat theorem was proposed in the late 90s by Eric Brewer who's a professor at Berkeley and he had a startup at the time I think uh I forget what it was called but like they basically were trying to reason about the different states of distributed systems at their startup and the cat there basically trying to say that like you have a distributed system a distributed data system uh that there's

these three properties you may want to have consistency always available and network partition tolerant I'll explain what they are each each of them but you can only pick two out of three right like if you're trying to pick a you know sort of the same rule of thumb like you know trying to pick a boyfriend or girlfriend they can either be really good-looking, really smart or not crazy and you can only get two out of three, right? Uh so the basic idea here, so the question we're trying to answer here

with the cat theorem is what happens when there is a network partition where the nodes can't communicate with each other. are can we still guarantee the consistency of the database or can we guarantee that it's still going to be available to run queries and the NoSQL guys will choose availability uh over consistency uh but any any sort of traditional relational data system or even the newer distributed SQL data systems they're going to choose consistency over availability [clears throat]

so let's see what see what this looks like so say that I have my my database I have a primary and a replica and I I have I have two application servers is running in two different uh two different data centers. So when the transaction over here wants to do a modification on a goes ahead and applies the change and then we send the the the the update to to the replica and again this is just sending over the right ahead log message that we talked about before and then once we know that the change has been applied right two-phase

commit whatever we want we can send back the acknowledgement to the application server saying your change has successfully saved right and then now if a transaction over here wants to read a right it could either go to the the replica or the primary and it's guaranteed to see the the same result because we've told the outside world our transactions committed. Right? [snorts] So if the primary says to the other transaction over there that you committed, then we can immediately see that change over on the on the replica,

right? Availability says that now if the replica goes down, then I can still run queries on the primary, right? and do whatever I need. But I can also have my application server on the other side send queries to the primary and read data and and as as I need over there and all that's fine, right? [snorts] The problem is going to be now when I have a partition tolerance or sorry when I have a network partition. So if the network goes down for whatever reason now I have my primary and my replica over here. My

primary is going to say, "Oh, well I was the primary before. I'm still the primary now. That's fine. I'll just run like as I did before." >> [clears throat] >> But the replica can't talk to the primary because the network's down. So it is is going to assume that the the pime the other primary failed has crashed. So now it's going to run leader election and decide that it's now the new primary. Right? And then so now the application server on one side of the network can

make changes to the it what it thinks is the primary. The other application server can make changes to what it thinks is the primary. Right? And those commit all that's fine. Right? But now the problem is going to be when the network comes back online, these two primaries are going to think, you know, they have the latest version of of the data of the database, but we've already told the outside world that these two separate transactions committed and now we got to reconcile the differences,

right? So that's that's the question we're trying to deal with. What happens when the network goes down? Should we stop everything and not run any queries until the network comes back up so we know that we don't have this this this split brain issue or should we allow changes get still happen but then we have to figure out how to reconcile them when we put it back together. So most distributed data systems that are doing transactions will do the first one like if if enough nodes go down

where you can't you no longer have a majority of the nodes then you you you say the system is unavailable. You can still run read only queries if you wanted, right? But no one's allowed to modify anything. No transaction can modify the database. And then eventually the other nodes will come up and then now you have a a a majority and then you now you know you're you're in a correct state. A alternative is that you allow both sides of the partition to still accept writes and reads and then when the the

the the system comes back online then you just figure out how to to to merge those changes together. So a simple thing would be like you just look at the time stamps of the records when they were modified and assume the the the latest one is going to be the the newest version, right? An alternative is you do what's called vector clocks. I don't think they even teach that anymore in distributed systems. Um but this is something less lame in embedded. Just think of like remember how multi- versioning every

time I did an update I created a new new physical version of of the tupil. But at the SQL level I can't see any of those different versions. I only see what the latest one or whatever's whatever the the I'm allowed to see within my snapshot. But with the vector clocks, the idea is like when I go read a tupil now, I'm going to get back the version chain of all the versions that of of that tupil that I'm trying to look up on and now it's my job in the client to figure out what is the right version I

should be looking at. And then most people do this the easiest thing just pick whatever the latest version assume that's the one I want. But actually that may not be the correct thing if you start doing multi-statement transactions. So most of the NoSQL systems will do last writer wins uh last update wins. There was I know one system that was doing vector clocks called React. Don't do this. This is this is super hard to do because your average JavaScript programmer isn't going to know what a

vector clock is. Isn't know how to reason about the correctness of the state of the database system, right? You're just better off either lying to them and say, "All right, last update wins." And deal with those problems later on or stop the system until you can you have all the nodes enough to figure out what's going on. >> [snorts] >> So the cap theorem is a pretty simplistic idea, right? Where it just assumes like oh do do I want to be able to handle things when there when there's

a partition uh you know let them be available or just guarantee that my database is going to be consistent. There was an extension to it called Pacy uh came out in 2010 which now includes the the the notion of consistency and uh latency because there's there's actually a trade-off between the two of these things that the original cap theorem doesn't cover, right? because I can wait forever until my my system comes back up and I'll guarantee consistency but then my latency is going to be you know minutes

or hours which is not realistic. So basically think like this. So I have my primary two replicas and say they're running in different data centers, right? I do a set on a uh I go ahead and applies the change here and then now I'll send those changes to the to the other nodes uh to my replicas apply the change and then now they're going to send me back an acknowledgement. But the question is be how long should the primary wait to hear back to know whether that they've accepted the change

has been successfully modified. Right? If I don't wait, if I don't wait a long time, then yeah, my latency will be low, but now I don't have any consistency guarantees because I don't know whether those changes actually made it, right? So, I could wait for one of them uh and then not know what happened to the other one because it's like I'm going over the underneath the ocean to to the to Europe, right? So, maybe that's I don't want to wait that long and that's that's

be bad for me. But again, there's no guarantee that when I go read the data, if if I tell the outside world that the transactions committed and I go read the data here, there's no guarantee that's going to be correct. Right? So then eventually again, if if I care about consistency, then I would wait for everyone to come back and say, I got your change. Then I tell the outside world that you successfully committed your your change, successfully modified. So latency is additional thing that like

the cat theorem doesn't cover. Uh, and again, usually there's a timeout and say how long I'm going to wait and then you can decide whether to abort the transaction because you haven't heard back from the other nodes or allow yourself to be in in a in a a sort of transient state. But that's okay because the application's allowed to do that, right? Now that I think about it, like it's the same way we talked about transactions. Like if it's your bank account and you're trying to count money stuff, you

want to have consistency because you you don't want to lose lose money. But if it's like a post on Reddit, who cares if it gets delayed by a couple seconds like no one's going to know really care about these things. So it's okay for me to be not consistent for that and eventually things will get propagated and updated correctly. My C or Facebook used to do this. Facebook used to have a single primary data center for all their updates. That would be in in the US and then they would have data centers would have

copies of of the database um the giant my SQL fleet. They would copy the database in different continents but then all the rights had to go into to the US then they would then get propagated out to the different continents and obviously that's a big round trip time. So what would happen is people would post on their timeline uh and then that right would have to go to the US and eventually would get propagated to like the South American data center. So that means if they refresh the page they wouldn't see their

own update and they think something was broken, something's wrong. So what they did is they just put a little uh store the post in your cookie in your browser so that when they refresh the page and read it from the cookie and showed it back to you. So you thought that things are fine even though it had been hasn't you know successfully made it from the the US data center and propagated to all the replicas they switched now to be a multi primary uh setup but that's a good trick where

like again I can it's okay for me to have not have latency or not have consistency guarantees because I can hide that uh in the application level because I I want lower latency for these >> [snorts] >> Okay, so that's again that's the crash course everything you need to know about for for doing transactions in a distributed OTB system. So let's talk about now how we're going to do analytical queries in in a distributed database system. Right? So the most expensive operation in a

distributed data system for for analytical queries is going to be the joints and it's going to depend on how the data is being partitioned and stored across the different nodes and whether it's share disk or share nothing it doesn't matter like how we're actually going to be able be able to to do our joints right and the stupidest thing which is if you want to do a you know join across distributed systems to copy all the data you want that across different nodes put it into a single

node and just run all the join algorithms we talked about earlier in the semester on a single box. Of course, now you lose all the parallelism uh of a distributed system and you know your data might may not even fit on a single node to be able to do that. So ideally I want to reduce the amount of data transfer I have and run my join most efficiently as possible. So what I'm going to be talking about now is the way we're going to organize data so that we can do our joins in a distributed data system.

We're still going to be doing all the join algorithms we talked about before. So nest loop join, hash join, and sort merge join. Those are the basic three categories of of joins. So all that still going to be applied here and we're still going to do that on on our local nodes. So now we're talking about is how are we going to move data if we need to across the nodes so that we can then compute those joins locally. Right? Again the goal is again we want our joint algorith produce the same result

same logical result uh when it's running a distributed system as it would on a single node system right SQL is unordered unless there's an order by so it's okay that the ordering of the output is different long the logical content should still be the same [snorts] all right so the first case scenario it would be the the most simplest thing right and this is where we want to do a join uh between tables R and S and the table R has been partitioned on the ID column which just happens to be our join key

and then table S is replicated on every single node. So think of like table R is a big big really big table and we divided it up partition and put it on different nodes. Table S is small. Think of like zip code tables like 35,000 records that's going to be in megabytes. We can put that on every single node. Now if we update this the the replicated table we got to run twobased commit or paxos make sure they're all in sync right from the stuff we just talked about but for this we can ignore that.

So again our data has been partitioned on on this key here. So that means to do the join between RNS for this query here we don't need to send data between the different nodes. Everything we have to do the join within one partition of R is available to us on our on our own node. So we'll run our own local nestloop joint, hash join, servers, join, whatever you want. We run that locally here. We we produce the result and then now one of the nodes will be designated the coordinator or the leader or

whatever whatever you know whoever's responsible for returning back the the the result to the application. The other nodes will send the data that for their local join to that other node. It just does a union on them which is cheap to do because just copying bytes or concatenating bytes together and then now produces the final result of the the partition join from the two nodes to a final to a single result. So this this is easy to do right because because things are you know everything's

all local. [snorts] Another easy easy case is when the data is partitioned on the join key. So in the last example, R was partitioned on ID and S was replicated. And now this example here, S is also partitioned on ID and the the the range of values line up uh between R and S in each partition, right? If it was hash partition, you wouldn't worry about the ranges, but it work the same way. So [snorts] again, just like before, I don't have to move data between the different nodes to do my join. I do my local join at every

single node, produce the, you know, the portion of the result that I have for each node, send that over to the network or however I want to get it to this other node who then combines it together and produces the output we send to the application. Now, where things get hard is when the data isn't partitioned on our join keys, which is which is common, right? Because you know sometimes it's obvious what picked it for you know for a partition key uh in the beginning when you start load some data but then eventually some

people might want to start running queries and start joining in ways that you didn't expect and now you have to account for that in in your implementation. So the first approach is called what's called a broadcast join. And this is where you identify that one of the data sets or one of the the tables you're trying to join is small enough uh that you could actually just broadcast and make a copy of it send it to every single node that's going to be participating in the join sending them

all you know whatever copy of the data they have. So for example, I'm partitioning uh table S on value, but I need it need to be partitioned on ID, right? So rather than partitioning on ID, what I'm doing is going to copy the the range of the values 1 to 50 from S over here to this node and then just combine together with 51 over 100. And I'll do the same thing on the other side. So now it's like my first case where I every node has a complete copy of the table S. Then I do my local join,

produce produce the result, send it over the wire, and combine it together. Yes, >> it's end to end. Yes. The question is if I have more than two nodes, do I do end to end send every node has to send their the pion part of the data to every other node? Yes. And if it's shared disk, you you could say all right well just go fetch it from the shared disk. But then depending on whether you pay for those reads like S3, Amazon charges you for every time you read something in S3. You don't have like you know 50 nodes go

read the same thing on S3. You have one node need it read it and then could send it out. That's usually cheaper way to do it or you have like a local cache that's outside S3. But it's the basic idea still is you're you're copying partitions of the data to every other node. So now they have a complete copy of the data data. So sometimes you'll see systems refer to these as broadcast joins but broadcast is just like a modifier for like what the you know there's still going to be a

a a basic join algorithm underneath that. So like it'll be a broadcast hash join instead of a broadcast join or broadcast start merge join instead of a you know but people just might just call it a broadcast join and typically that means they're doing a hash join. All right, the last one is where the both tables are not are too big to be uh broadcast and replicated around. Um, and they're also not on the uh not partitioned on the join key. So I have to do what's called a shuffle to

basically repartition the data on the fly based on my join key. So that now when I do my join uh on every single node, every node has all the data that it needs. So in this case here, table R is partitioned on name and I needs to be partitioned on R ID. So I'll decide what the partitioning boundaries are either with rain partitioning or using hash partitioning or just hash the key that I'm trying to join on. And every node is going to send their portion of the data to all other nodes, right? And then same

thing for S. And then now I'm in my second scenario where the the the the data is now on every single node. It's partitioned on on that join key. I can do my local join and then copy the result over and send it back to the application that way. And just like in broadcast join, uh some systems will call these shuffle joins, but it's really shuffle hash joint shuffle join. Yes. >> The question is is this the same as map reduce? Yes. uh map produce is so yes it is same in map reduce but distributed systems existed

before map reduce so there's a there you know there's um map reduce came out like oh my god this is groundbreaking we've never seen it before it's distributed data system from the 80s and 90s it's the same idea like the the map function is basically a group by and and and a sort in some cases okay so One visual option we can do is called a semi join. And I know I'll explain next class what fact tables and dimension tables are. Just think of like fact tables like I have a giant table of

every single time someone bought something on Amazon. Like it's a one row would be like somebody bought this, someone bought that. And dimension table would be a a t a side table that's usually read only would contain things like you know the the item name, the item description. You wouldn't put that in the giant fact table. So dimension tables could be like the zip code for example. I'll show what this looks like in the class. But a one option we can do is called a semi join where instead of sending

around the entire data set between the different nodes when I do the shuffles of the broadcasts, I'm going to send a summarization or the bare minimum information I need between the different nodes in order for me to compute the join. So let's say that I have I'm joining a fact table and dimension table and the fact table is on one giant node and then dimension tables on another node. So instead of uh instead of moving the data around, what I'm then going to do is sort of run a sub query on this

side table here to just get out all the records where the zip code equals one uh 15213. And then I'm going to send that over now to this node here. And I'm still not going to want to compute the join, right? Instead, what I'm going to do is apply this filter to strip out all the things I actually need. uh the the actual records I want from the fact table and then send that smaller portion over here to now compute my joint right and the trick is like if it's based on what the the output of the

query is the projection output for example if you notice I need all the elements from the dimension table but I only need the price from the fact table so I don't want to have again can copy the entire tupil I want to do my projection on that node here again the projection predicate push down we talked about before to filter out all the redundant or unnecessary information I need before I send that over the wire. Furthermore, I can optimize this even more by over here instead of actually sending maybe the list of the records

here, I could send like a bloom filter because that's super compact to send that over the wire and then do the the filtering on that side and then send my results later on. >> Yes. [snorts] The question is can this be done can can this optimization be uh can the query plan where this optimization be applied in the query optimizer? Yes. So some systems I think allow you to specify semi-join in SQL but it's not in the standard. Yes. But like there is like I think some systems have like a semi-join operator

in SQL but that's not in the standard right. It underneath the covers. Yes. like like you like for the example here I didn't write in my my select query that I'm doing a semi- join the optimizer figured it out that it could support that and it does all that that predicate projection push down when it runs it all right so let me finish this last thing so the I sort of was lying when not lying but I I sort of was not saying the entire truth when I said joints are the most expensive thing in a dribblap

The most expensive thing is actually going to be shuffles. That shuffle thing I showed in in the in the the ship of joints, that fourth phase of moving data around. If you have to do that, that's always going to be uh super slow. Now, why would you want to shuffle? Because you're using it for a join. So, technically, yes, the joints arensive thing, but within that join operation itself, the shuffle phase is usually going to be the biggest bottleneck for you because you're copying data and

moving across the network and have to send it somewhere else, right? So the the challenge is going to be how can we uh you know how can we make that run efficiently and furthermore what if our data is highly skewed so that when we start doing the shuffle and the repartitioning things um or the data itself when when it originally you know resides without doing the shuffle like what if one nodes has a large majority of all the data when we're trying to do the join or any other query operation

then all our other machines are going to be idle while that one node is trying crunch through the bulk of the data. So the shuffle phase is gonna allow us to redistribute data across our distributed system in such a way that we can rebalance things and repartition it so that we can compute you know most of our operations we need for our query on on the local nodes right only touching data that's local to us. So some systems will will incorporate shuffle uh as it's sort of once in a while like some queries you

need you know you're doing a shuffle join then I have to do a uh have a shuffle shuffle operator other systems like big query for every single time I have a pipeline breaker they're going to introduce a shuffle uh explicitly and this allows them to do certain optimizations like decide while the query is running whether they need more nodes or fewer nodes to compute whatever it is they want to compute and They use that the the shuffle staging process as sort of a a an intermediate staging

checkpoint if you will for the query to decide okay this is what I'm seeing in the data at this my at this sort of pipeline breaker I can then decide how to then reorganize the other parts of the the query plan going up above there are some systems uh that can you can swap out what the the sort of the built-in shuffle implementation to switch it with one of these open source ones Celiborn and Unifl uh these came out of the Chinese companies but these are like open- source systems that only do shuffle in

the case of Google and BigQuery shuffle is so important for them they have specialized hardware to do inmemory shuffle that runs on like smart nick FPGAAS to make the shuffle phase go fast as possible right because it's nice it's sort of abstracting away um the idea is like this sort of shuffle step stage allows us to implement different operators up and down the query plan without worrying about how we're going to move things around. The shuffle phase is going to do that for us. So I don't have to write a

partition aware hash join operator. If I just do my shuffle phase before I do a join, then every node can just have the local implementation of their hash joint. So it basically looks like this. So say I'm I my my I first stage my my query considered like the first pipeline. It's almost like a producer consumer model. So they're reading data up from from either from from disk or from other nodes in in the query plan or other workers. Uh actually not other workers like the say from like either local disc or share

disk. They're reading it in producing some output and then now they're going to do take the output of the data and hash it on on whatever partition key I care about and I modify the number of shuffle nodes that I have. And if these guys run out of memory because I want to keep things in memory, then I can spill over to a shared disc. Then now in the second stage that comes after this, I can decide well I don't have as much data as I thought it I was going to have after I do whatever the first workers

were doing to clean things up or process the queries. Uh so therefore I only need three workers, right? I don't have to have a one to one correspondence between the workers in the first stage and the workers in the second phase because the shuffle phase abstracts that away. And then now these workers will then be reading data out from from the the shuffle nodes or reading it from the shared disk to then produce whatever the result they want to send it off to the next stage or to the final result of the

query. So what does this smell like when we talk about parallel query execution not map reduce map reduce has a shovel f has trouble phase yes but databases did it first it's the exchange operator right and in particular it's this bottom one here the repartition right I can have a bunch of operators feeding data up in parallel to some repartition box right so that red box has to be partitioned that's that middle phase the shuffle nodes. So it's the same idea rather I'm running on on a

single box or distributed system, right? It's I it allows me to have these these sort of break points in my query that I can then decide how to reorganize things and then repartition it based on what my query wants to do. All right, so again that's a crash course for distributed databases. Um the main takeaways should be that uh having strong consistency for transactions is hard to do but it's it's important necessary because we can't assume the application developer is going to know how to reason about

inconsistent data right and then paxos twobased commit and raft are the most common uh uh consensus protocols or atomic commit protocols that distributed data systems use it's probably raft outpaces uh paxos now just because there's a lot of open source source implementations of raft. In Pexos, there wasn't really any. Um, and when we do distributed joins, we want to minimize the data we have to move and we we don't want any false neg false sorry false negatives. So, we need to make sure that

in order to compute the data we want through our local join on every single node, we have the data that we need because we repartition things and move things around ahead of time. Okay. All right. So, next class will be the last class. DJ Cashache will be back. We will do a start off with the the the review for the final cover over the main topics. We can cover this atomic fit protocol and integrity strra violation stuff we talked about before and then I'm going to try to cram in what you you

would have learned in 721 into a single lecture. So we'll try to basically build up all the analytical stuff we talk about at the end here. We'll try to talk about how to make the queries run fast through vectorization uh just time compilation how different data formats look like how to do uh parallel hash joins just try to cram as much as I can but obviously none of that will be on the final exam okay [music] [music] tracks >> [music] >> Bad ass for [music] Maintain flow with the grain for [music]

maintain flow with the grain.

