[music] [music] I'm still ass. [music] [music] >> Uh, let's get started again. Round of applause for DJ Cash. last class again. Uh, so we missed you on Monday, >> right? >> Text accountant. >> And then what was the dude who showed up my office? >> He's just a crazy fan. >> He said he was like your long lost brother or something stupid. >> Do you know that guy or >> No. No. >> Okay. All right. All right. Again, thank you so much for keeping keeping it fresh

this semester. Um, all right, guys. So, a lot to cover today. Uh, plus we have a guest speaker at the end. Uh, so let's jump right into it. Again, project four is due this this Sunday. on Monday or sorry on Saturday we have the office special office hours again three o'clock 3 to 5 in in gates on the fifth floor homework six is also due this this Sunday as well we will then release the solutions to it on Monday the prep for the exam which is going to be on December 11th at 1 p.m. not here but in

the student uh university center or the main auditorium. Uh so again we'll cover that immediately after this slide. And then if you want to TA next semester for this class since we're not teaching 721 uh please sign up here. Any questions about project 4 the final exam or the homework? Yes. >> Question is can you project four can you use late days? Yes. Other questions? All right let's let's plow through this. Okay. So, um I will post this on Piaza. Uh but the I will have an additional

office hours on the Wednesday before the exam in the morning and in the afternoon. Uh all the TAs will have their their their regular office hours up until this Saturday inclusive. Then after that, they won't be available. If you can't meet this time with me, uh please send me an email and we try to make an arrangements. And then I think Will also will be in town as well and I'll see whether he can be available on Monday or Tuesday depending on his schedule. So, as I said, the final exam

is going to be this uh next Thursday coming up. You need to bring your senu ID. You need to bring a pencil and an eraser, calculator, cell phone is okay, right? Do basic logs and things like that. And then just like the midterm, you can write a uh a on a regular eight and a half. I love my like sheet of paper, handwritten notes about whatever whatever you want in the uh for you to study. Okay. And then there's a practice exam that's available that I posted on Piaza this week and also available on

the website here. Okay. Uh you can bring food if you want. I think that's allowed. Just don't bring weird [ __ ] Like one year somebody brought wet laundry. Don't do that. Uh somebody brought candles one year. Don't do that. Um another I had a friend at another school. They somebody brought a therapy snake to an exam. Don't do that. Right. Be be reasonable. Okay. All right. So the stuff that you need to be aware of uh that we covered in throughout the semester or sorry before the midterm but

we've obviously need to build upon it throughout the that everything we talked about after the midterm are right are are listed here. You obviously can't we we will not ask you a in-depth SQL question in the same way that we did in the midterm. You obviously need to be able to understand what select star from table does, right? Especially in the context of understanding the query processing models >> uh like in ter how window functions are implemented or how window functions are uh like the SQL syntax for it.

>> Uh I don't so I I have not written the final exam yet. I don't plan to write a window function question. Uh >> yeah, they're not hard. It's just a group eye. >> It's weird. >> It's weird, but it's like it's group eye. Again, my the the idea of the midterms understand is see if you understand the semantics of what the window function is actually doing. That's not what we've covered since in the in the in the since the midterm. We've covered how to build all the stuff

to actually run transactions and run queries. All right. And then basic understanding of bus tub again something very light because obviously we can't have you write code and try to compile and debug it in the middle of the of the uh in the final exam. This is just to get a rough understanding of um you know did you actually do the projects right again we can't ask you like what is you on this file what is this line what's this line of code we're not going to ask you those things it's more conceptual things okay

all right so the main things we covered uh since before the midterm we had the one class before the the Monday before the midterm we talked about join algorithms and we talked about the the three basic nestloop joint algorithms you can have the naive one where you just go and getting a block for every single tupil that's stupid don't do that. Uh but we talked about how to do block nestloop join index nestloop join talked about how to do sort merge join building upon the external merge sort

stuff we talked about before. um hash joins, the simple case, the partition case, and the hybrid hash join where you keep one hash table for the hot sort of hot partition in memory and then you let everything else spell to disk and then basic optimizations for uh using bloom filters and how to cost the the hash sorry the joins in general, right? Sort of given set of tupils and a set of pages, right? All right. And again, am m amount of memory buffers. Can you cost how much it would take to run the join

with, you know, start merge join versus a hash join. [clears throat] All right. Then we talk about query execution. Um we we talk about um crapization. Actually, I'm missing a slide here. Grabization. We talked about uh the basic high level architecture of like top down versus bottom up. Again, we can't ask you very anything anything real in depth. But we also spent time talking about how to cost or estimate the cardality selectivity of predicates, right? Uh and using basic histograms. So

you expect to see a question like that. Again, it's not that difficult. You just look at the predicate and then you can't we can't ask you anything too too in depth on this. So don't don't freak out about it. For the query execution, we talked about the three different execution models. Iterator or the volcano model. It's calling get next getting a single tup at a time. Materialize is sending all the the tupils from one operator up to the next operator and then vector of batch is

sending you know a batch of tupils instead of one at a time. And then we talked about the the difference between a push versus pull query processing model, right? Am I going to invoke at the root call get next and have that percolate down and pull tubless up or I start at the leaf nodes run those operators and send send the data up the plan. We talked about the different access methods, sequential scan, the types optimizations we some of them we'll cover again today. Uh index scan being able to take you know a single index or

multiple indexes and run you know get evaluate predicates. Uh and then how to handle update queries in in our system. We talked a little bit about expression valuation. Again we'll talk about it again today. Um just like what does the tree look like and how would you actually apply that on a per tupal basis when you run your queries. for uh query execution. We talked about the the process models. There's there is a single process per worker, single thread thread per worker. What are the

pros and cons of those? Uh we talked about the different variations of doing parallel query execution, right? Interquery parallelism means that I can run multiple queries at the same time. Intra query parallelism means that I can have for a single query multiple workers working together to process it. And then the difference between the the horizontal versus vertical. The horizontal is when I have the most multiple instances of the operator running on different workers to to read or process data for different subsets of

the of a table or subsets of the input data. I can think if I partition it on ranges, I can have different workers work on different r ranges. And then vertical partitioning is more um not as common, but this is where you could have one operator running some, you know, doing some processing and then they're streaming data up to the next operator who could run in parallel at the same time. And then we briefly talked about IO parallelism uh where we talked about the you know what do the data system see when it has

multiple discs could be abstracted away with RAID or or or an appliance or should the data system be specifically aware of like here's the different discs that I have and how to take advantage of them and the most obvious thing is is with we didn't talk about it when at the time when we talked about IO parallelism but like with right ahead logging a very common approach systems use is they have one disc for the the regular tables and then another really fast disc dis disclo because I want to get data out to the

right head log as fast as possible commit transactions and then tell the outside world that I committed. So I I want my fastest disc to be for the logging. H okay. So I did have a slide is out of order. Sorry. Right. I've already said this already. Great optimization basic heristics. We can apply predicate push down projection push down. Uh let's we won't we won't focus too much on we won't ask you anything about nest subqueries. Don't worry about that. Um but statistics carality missions looking

at histograms sketches how to be able to say for a given predicate on my table here's some summarization of the data what's the what's the selectivity estimate for a predicate again we can't ask you anything really complicated because you know we can't give you a giant huge huge histogram all right and then we spent a lot of time talking about transactions right we spent a whole lecture talking about the basics of acid atomicity consistency isolation durability Right. So understand what all those

those four attributes mean. What are those guarantees the system is trying to apply or um provide for applications. We talked about conflict serializability. So how do we want to check for correctness to say that a schedule is going to be conflict serializable for the transactions that are inside of it. Um and how can we check whether two schedules are considered equivalent or conflict equivalent. View serializability is again a more fuzzy idea fuzzy concept of of of serializability. just understand what

are the distinctions between viewer relizability and conflict certizability. So which one's more flexible like conflict conflict serializability or abuse serializability >> view right but like how to be able to identify that at runtime is impossible unless you understand what the application actually wants. Right? So just just being able to understand that some schedules may be still serializable but they'll be view serializable and not conflict serializable and a real system couldn't actually provide that.

Then we talk about talk about isolation levels right the the main ones in the SQL at least anti-SQL standard right serializable is at the top then you have uh repeatable read and below that you have uh read committed and below that you have read uncommitted and then snapshot isolation is this other thing on the side that provides uh certain guarantees that the other ones don't right and so one of the main anomalies that can occur for transactions on these different isolation levels again could

occur doesn't mean that always will but they could occur And what are the mechanisms you would use to protect them? >> Say it again. >> Can we ever say that anomaly? >> The question is uh can we ever say that anomaly will occur under isolation level? Uh oh. So basically you're asking whether could we predict for a given isolation level and a maybe set of transactions actually running that you will incur these things. Um often times it's like a race condition like in in a real system

be able to say like if I run this you know like maybe one one transaction will get paused because like a disc read or write or something and then it gets stalled and therefore it won't see certain things. It won't see certain anomalies but like that disc isn't there then it does see it. There's a bunch of layers. It's hard to be able to predict this and that's why it's like it says it may occur, right? Because if I run a read uncommitted but I only want one transaction at a time, then like it's

technically serizable, right? There's one there's some theory work on how to how to determine I think after the fact whether a transaction uh saw something that it shouldn't have seen and then try to then understand what are the long-term implications of that for data. Like if if you we're off topic, but like if my transaction does it incurs an anomaly, but then I write something to the database, then technically anybody that comes along later that reads and writes based on what I wrote is now kind of incorrect as

well like the butterfly effect and how to measure that it's like impossible. All right. So then we spent a lecture on talking about transactions in the context of two-based locking. Uh again the idea of two-phase locking is that I acquire locks either shared locks or exclusive locks while in in in sort of the growing phase and then as soon as I release one lock then I automatically end up in the uh in the shrinking phase. But as we said in in in SQL in real systems there isn't an explicit call to

unlock to unlock your locks or give your locks back. And so most systems are going to run either with uh strict 2PL or strong strict UPL. strict PL strict DPL just means that I going to hold my uh exclusive locks until the very end uh and give them up all when I commit but I'm allowed to release the share locks earlier um just you know during the shrinking phase assuming I can know how to get into that shrinking phase or that I'm in the shrinking phase and then strong strict 2PL just I think the textbook

might also call this rigorous 2PL this just says that I'm going to hold all my shared locks and exclusive locks till the very end so technically there isn't a there isn't a shrinking phase just the whole thing is a growing phase. All right, we talked about the cascading abort problem. I instruct strong shrink TPL uh can avoid this, right? Because I can't I'm not going to release my exclusive lock until I commit. So therefore, nobody can read my no no other transaction can read my dirty read

and therefore I won't have a cascading abort. We talked about how to handle deadlock deadlocks either through deadlock detection or deadlock prevention. A deadlock detection was just identifying of cycles in the weights for graph then killing a transaction to break you know killing some transaction to break the deadlock but you may had to kill multiple transactions to make that happen. And then deadlock prevention was the wound weight and weight die approach where you order the the the the order in which the

the the transactions ordering based on the priority of their time stamp determines whether they're allowed allowed or not whether they can wait or not wait for another transaction that holds the the lock that they want and whether you're allowed to kill that other transaction and take their lock or uh you kill yourself. [snorts] Then we talk about the multiple randomity locking. So these are intention locks like in the hierarchy I have at the top I have my my a lock to my database or lock my tables and within

below that I have lock for pages or or tupils or even single attributes. So understand when you want to use intention attention locks or shared intention exclusive locks to to minimize the amount of uh back and forth I have between my transaction and the lock manager uh but also still maximize the amount of parallelism I would allow in in the system. So the intention locks are like the hints for us at the higher part of the hierarchy to say what's going on down below. All right. Then we talked about uh

timestamp holding transactions or optimistic occurrency control. Right? So understand the what are the three phases in OC. Right? You have the read phase where I'm reading and writing to the database but I'm making changes to my private workspace. And then when the transaction goes to commit there's a validation phase. and assume that for simplicity you're going to run this in in with a single thread and there's a single global latch that you take in the database to do this validation step to

avoid weird weird conflicts to make make your life easier but understand what the differences are between backwards validation and forwards validation right backwards is looking back to see transactions that previously committed to determine whether they wrote something that you didn't read and therefore that would violate serializable ordering and you killed yourself and then forwards validation would be did a transaction that hasn't committed yet write to something that sorry read something that I'm going to

write to or try to write to and therefore since if they didn't see my update if I commit then again that would violate the serializable ordering then we spent time talking about uh MVCC multi version current we talked about the different ways to to store the diversions right there's the appendon only approach the time travel table and then the delta records right so understand the trade-offs the implications of of these three different approaches Then's the way you would actually maintain the version chain. You go

oldest to newest or newest to oldest. Your pendul can go in both directions. And what are the pros and cons of those? Delta storage typically goes uh newest to oldest. You just you put the old the old version goes in that roll back segment or the delta storage area. Understand what happens in garbage collection. How we how we find the tupils that that that are reclaimable and remove them. What happens when we remove tupils that need to update indexes? when does that happen and how do we make sure that we don't have any

conflicts when we do those things and then there was a question on pata asking about MVCC with 2PL so I quickly just go over that again I think the textbook is saying one thing and I'm saying something something else um so this is the setup we have before we have two transactions T1 and T2 and they get timestamps in the beginning right t1 is going to read on A and uh then it's going to write on A and so the The way this works is that there's no uh you don't take shared locks uh on on tupils because you want to

allow the a writer writing transaction to to create a new version. But you can only allow one transaction create a new version at a time, right? So there's an exclusive lock, but it's it's it's on the the new version that's being created, right? So this transaction T1 is going to create a new version here, right? Add to this We set it, you know, the beginning time stamp to our current time stamp. The end time stamp is currently infinity. And since the previous time stamp, since

we're going oldest to newest is also infinity, we'll set that to be our time stamp. This is sort of bounding the the the visibility of this of this uh of this record. So now if any transaction comes along with a time stamp less than one uh they would see they would be able to read a z right then we do a contact switch t2 starts running right it reads a and again since the time stamp is two is is two it's in the future you know and logically it's in the future from from t1 so therefore it's going to it hasn't

can't see the the update yet because t t1 hasn't committed yet. So it's going to be able to read a Z because again readers don't block the writers and then when it tries to write to it and once it try to get the exclusive lock on creating the new version for the new physical version for the single logical tupil and therefore it has to stall and wait rights assuming we're doing TPL with deadlock detection. If it was doing TPL with wound, weight, weight or die, again that would T1 T sorry, T2 could

potentially steal the lock from T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T1 and and have to roll back his changes. But assum we're just doing simple uh TPL with deadlock detection. So then now when T1 comes back, it reads an A, it'll read its own read its own right that it did before. That's fine. when it goes ahead and commits uh then now that now it's it's um status in the transaction table gets updated it's now committed so now it would know that

anybody coming along could should be able to read this uh if they wanted to right and then now in this case here it can can create the new version so to your point here yes and this this here would be a um this is an example of a of a what's that >> so it's It's technically right skew because I'm reading something um I'm reading something that in the past where they were both seeing the same thing but then I was allowed to overwrite it. >> There's >> what's that?

>> There is an >> Yeah. So there's an Yes. Yes. And that's the whole point of like like [snorts] the you to make it fully serializable. The extra step would then be like identify that you wrote you're trying to write to the same thing and that you read something in the past that that you should have read the other version and you have to go kill that transaction. So there's a you if you want to get full serialized there's a dependency at the graph you have to maintain as well.

That's what postgress does. >> Just be care it's not config >> in this example. No. Yeah. [snorts] Even with regular MCC without Yeah. with with snapshot isolation without the extra check you make sure am I violating uh do I have a right anomaly you're not you're not serializable like if the fact you incur the right to anomaly means you're not serializable >> the question is what does the effect of MCC have on 2PL meaning the what is the like the what is the performance

overhead of maintaining versions um I mean there's there's pros and cons right the fact that I can read something with without having to I can read something I can read an older version like I can have my readers not be blocked by the writers there's advantage to that right like is so is that worth it versus paying the overhead of maintaining the the rollback segments and things like that right or maintaining the different versions >> you still have to maintain versions like with regl I got to

maintain versions anyway but it's like it's almost like where it's my private workspace because I have to have my my undo buffer if I'm overwriting because it's a single version I got to be able to go back and remove that right so I got to store the old version somewhere anyway >> and so you could store that in the right head log but then now like if if that gets flushed to disk and I don't have it in memory now when I board and roll back I go back to disk read back the right

log and replay it, right? It's, you know, there's no free launch. >> All right. Um, >> my second question was, >> the question is, the statement is that the textbook says that, yeah, I saw that the textbook says that um, MVCC with 2PL always uses strict 2PL. Um, so like I think the textbook is wrong. So I'll I'll I'll post on Piaza. There's the So I'm going by this there's this famous textbook uh on nothing but transactions from Jim Gray and Reuter the guy that

coined acid and Jim Gray the wer from the 80s that talk about how they do MBCC and I don't like on their definition it doesn't have to be stripped >> Huh. So no we should not assume strict >> the question should we assume strict any question on the exam will be very explicit like what the protocol it is right to avoid any ambiguities um but like [clears throat] like Postgress does MVCC with 2PL and I I'm pretty sure they're not using strict QPL um SQL server does strong strict I think

um yeah I'll I'll I'll post a link afterwards >> [snorts] >> again and the main takeway is for any question I would be very explicit about like it's this protocol with this versioning uh and this concurrent stream and this like this ver uh here's the version chain ordering like we'll lay out things very uh in in full detail so there's not like oh what's you know there's not like oh it could be this but if it's this like I want to avoid all that

all right then after transactions we talk about how to how to recover our transactions if there's a crash right we talked about the the two main policies you have in your bufferable implementation. Steel versus no steel. Steel means that I can write out dirty pages from transactions that haven't committed yet out to disk. No steel says you cannot. Force says that when a transaction commits, all its dirty pages that are in the buffer pool have to be written to disk before you tell the outside what your transactions

committed. No force says you don't have to do that. So write a head log is using what? Steal no force, right? Because redhead log allows us to flush out the dirty pages from uncommitted transactions. As long as the log records that correspond to the changes to those pages, long as that's flush to disk, then then that's okay. We talked about shadow paging. Again, understand the pros and the cons of this approach relative to write ahead logging. Uh and then we talked about again how how write ahead log the the

notion of these log sequence numbers permeate all throughout our implementation of our database system including the buffer man manager and it's it's what I just said I can't flush a dirty page until the the the page LSN or the the the last the newest LSN that modified that page till that's been written out to disk and once that's flushed then I can flush the dirty page. [snorts] Then we talked about how to handle uh crash recovery and based on redhead logging like there's nothing to

recover in shadow paging there's nothing to do when you come back you just the database is guaranteed to be in a consistent state so you don't do anything right ahead logging we need to do extra work and we choose to use right ahead logging over shadow paging because the runtime performance is faster with right ahead logging versus shadow paging but if you care about instant recovery then you would do shadow paging we talked about the different notions of checkpoints so fuzzy versus non-fuzzy

Right. And then within the the the fuzzy checkpoints, we talked about the dirty page table, the active transaction table, all the components we need to do the areas based recovery based on checkpoints and and the redhead log. Then again, we went through very quickly at the end of the semester talking about distributed databases. So again, we can't ask you too many too many too low level details. It's the high level concepts that we care about. So what are the different system architectures?

basically shared disk versus shared nothing. uh how we can do replication multi- primary versus uh primary primary replica or leader follower different partitioning schemes horizontal partitioning then we talk about two-phase commit and paxos again that was last class we can't we obviously went through it pretty quickly so we can't ask you any lowle detail questions how we do query execution in particular how to do distributed joins uh in our system and then the semi- join optimization of just passing along

balloon filters instead of the actual entire data So last class there was a question about in the context of Paxos uh in comparison with uh two-phase commit how do we handle integrity constraint violations and the what I sort of messed up in the in the description of it is the thing to understand about like two-phase commit is that you're kind of you can have all of the um in two-phase commit all the nodes have to agree the partitions have to agree we want to commit this transaction and in a paxos you need the

majority that means that if you're going to use paxos or raft you have to have the decision of whether this transaction has violated any integrity constraints has to be figured out before you allow begin the commit process. So another way to think about it is like it has to be a deterministic operation that like we want to do this yes or no. Uh and it can't be any any ambiguity between the different nodes to say like one guy says no because they're checking things at the moment I be after I've started the

commit process right so in two-based commit again it's all everyone has to agree to commit. So when this guy says hey we're going to go to commit prepare and this guy says okay this guy says not okay right this is allowed to happen under two base commit because every node can independently decide whether this thing is allowed to commit or not right uh and so this this where you would check for integrity extreme violations in paxos what would happen or in raft what would happen is the the coordinator node or I think the

the proposer node or the leader they would determine at that point when we we begin the commit process this transaction has not violated any of the integrity constraints. Therefore, I'm allowed to commit and therefore just getting everyone else to agree that this is the order in which we're going to commit this transaction that has already passed our validation steps. >> Question when particip if somebody else tries to commit another transaction another and it says I want to go next in

the log. So again, it's a state machine. You're just trying to order the the the commits and If if there's like a split brain where, you know, there's a network partition, each side wants to start, you know, committing transactions on their own and then when they form back together and and it gets reconnected, somebody else thinks they're the leader and they try to propose to commit a transaction. But now you would have, if you allow that to happen, then one node would say it's

transaction one followed by two, another one say it's two followed by one. You can't allow that to happen. And that's why you have to determine you have to be deterministic in the decision that this thing is allowed to commit at the moment. you commit. >> Yes. >> Doesn't the process of checking the conraints already involve all the nodes. The question is if the constraints are very complicated uh aren't the nodes going to have to coordinate with each other to uh which would just be the same

amount of overhead of going running Paxos. So the dirty secret is in distributed systems oftent times they don't have the full uh integrity and referential constraints that a single node system would have. Often times you don't get foreign key constraints in a distributed database because that checking is expensive. >> What's that? What about >> questions? What about Spanner? Uh I think I know Spanner gives you primary keys. Uh Spanner gives you unique keys. I think I think they'll give you also

foreign keys as well because if what's that? >> Say it again. >> Check. >> Would they check it for you? >> Oh, the check the check keyword in SQL. Uh I mean for the like check not null. Sure. Right. Um like the talking about when you call like alter table create table those checks aren't that complicated though I mean you you can you can't it's the it's the asserts that's what nobody supports you can do a global asserts that says anytime I commit to this table run this

full query and if it returns I think if it returns anything then I think it's a violation so like as long as query returns null then uh then I my constraint is not violated nobody supports that in the shipment environment because that could just be a broadcast query to everyone for every single transition you commit. So no one does that but spanner I think I mean we double check spanner is going to be foreign keys primary keys basic check constraints but often times the foreign keys is the first thing to go most

systems in shipping environments. Yeah. So they have foreign keys that >> the statement is spanner has foreign keys that involves some internet communication depends on how the how the the tables are partitioned. >> Yeah. >> If like if if you have a a student table and you have ID and then I have a enroll table with student ID and the foreign key reference to the student ID. If I partition both tables so that like student ID 1 123 and enrolled records for student ID 123 are in the same box,

that's not a big deal. It's the broadcast ones that cause problems. >> Yeah. >> For partitioning or for the foreign keys. >> Yeah. So, so like often times some systems will say like if you don't partition, if you don't set the partition key to be the same as the the foreign key, we're not going to check it for you. >> Okay. >> And there, you know, whether or not that's okay for your application depends on your system. Okay. All right. So again, quickly the the

things that aren't going to be the exam, any of the flash talks, any of the seminar talks we've had on Mondays or Tuesdays, those aren't the final exams. And then like again, sometimes I go off the rails and we just had this, you know, diet tribe about Spanner. >> No, no, no. It's fine. Um I mean Spanner is a fascinating system. It's like I I'm not going to cover it today, but like we can talk about it uh another time. Um but anything that like oh SQL server does this or my SQL does that post that

that's obviously not going to be in the exam because again that's just like a a an example of a implementation of the concepts that we talked about throughout the semester. Okay. All right. Any final questions about the final. Okay. So let's try to get through uh 7:21 uh in we have what 45 minutes. Let's see what we can do. Okay. So I showed this slide I think in lecture 13 or so where I said here's all the ways uh you can make squal scans go faster. Right? We we've covered all

these uh except for materialized views and result caching. Result caching is basically says if my same SQL query shows up uh multiple times and the data hasn't changed, I just cache a result and give it back to you. So I don't actually run the queries, give you back a cache result and some systems will do that. Materialized view um these are more complicated. If you want to do incremental uh maintenance, this is like if I define a materialized view, I define a SQL query. I want to cache the

result, but then anytime the data changes, rather than rerunning rerunning the entire query, I can do like an incremental update. For some things it's easy like a like a count with a group by on a key. Every time I I add a new key for that I just increment the counter by one. It's the joins are when things get complicated. Yes. >> The question is will the exam take full three hours? No. You can sit around for three hours you want but it'll be the same roughly the same length of of

material as the midterm. So hour what 20 right. And I would say the um because we chart this because I I love data. Uh there does not seem to be a correlation between how long it takes somebody to complete the exam and their grade. So the person usually finishes first sometimes gets the highest grade, sometimes gets the lowest grade. Uh and the person that finishes fast, the one year the person got perfect score because they and they finished the very end, right? So uh you take as long as you want.

>> Say again. solution type or it just go >> uh no like we would write on the exam when someone turns it in. Yeah. Um okay so again these are all the things we talked about the entire semester again materialized views again these are hard to do like postgress you can declare materialized view it won't increment it for you got to call manually refresh right in some systems that can actually maintain them incrementally so I want to focus on this down here so we're we're 721 is

typically about analytical systems how to make a uh how to you know build a system that run OLAP queries as fast as possible so let's talk about code specialization and compilation All right. So they they we have a really simple select query like this. Select star from table where key is greater than uh greater than low value and key is less than high value. So the first thing is like how do we want to organize our code to make this run as fast as possible uh without doing any special hardware tricks, right? And so we want

to be mindful of what modern CPUs look like and what they do for us. And then we can actually design and write code in such a way that maybe is not intuitive for us as humans to write but it actually turns out to be the best thing to do for a modern supercaler CPU. Right? So this is you know rough code that you would have seen in bustop right get it for every single tube on the table go look up the key and then apply our predicate here right and if the key satisfies our predicate then we'll copy

the tupil in our output buffer assume we're doing uh vectorized query processing right [snorts] but you know if you take an architecture class there's a there's a problem here right assume I have a billion tupless I'm ripping through this what's what's going to be the slow thing for branching the if clause, right? Because how does a supercaler CPU work? It tries to predict whenever sees a jump, right? Or a branch, it tries to predict what branch you're going to go down, right?

Is this thing going to satisfy to true or not? And then it specly executes the the instructions because they're all within, you know, within its pipeline. It expectly execute the instructions assuming you're going to go down a certain path in the branch, right? And if you get it wrong, it's like OC. you abort the changes you made, roll back and then reexecute things again. We got to flush your pipeline to to roll back. So what you want to write in a modern day system for superless CPU CPUs is

code like this where I go get every single tupole in my table and the first thing I'm going to do is I'm going to copy into my output buffer, right? And then later on I'm going to check my uh predicate. And now I'm just going to do a turnary operation and and between ones and zeros. And that's going to determine if both these are satisfied to true then delta is equal to one. And that's going to increment my counter of where I'm writing to my output buffer by one. Right? I'm ignoring things when you

break out of the loop like check to see whether the last thing should even be there or not. But like you know that's true code to write too. >> Uh yeah question is why you Why even need to turn a do key less than one zero and it? Yes, it would give you one and zero. Just being just being more explicit. The compiler will take care of that. Yes. >> Question. Aren't you still branching? No. >> Assuming the compiler gets rid of that. Right. Right. And again, this seems counterintuitive

to us as humans. Like I'm like I'm copying every single time and then check to see whether I should have copied the last thing I copied. And then if it doesn't satisfy true, then I loop back around and just overwrite the last one. And again, when I break out of the loop, I got to check the the delta the last one to see whether I should keep it or not. >> The question is the copy might be really expensive as well. Again, assuming I'm operating on vectors of data on in a columnar format, I'm ripping through

columns. So, this is a a a graph from a from the paper from the the CW guys from a few years ago, but this is showing you the the performance difference between these two approaches. So, it's kind of hard to see. The blue line that loops at the top, that's the branching one. And the yaxis, sorry, the x- axis here is the is the selectivity of a predicate, right? So when the selectivity is zero or less than five uh 5% then most of the tupils aren't satisfying my predicate and the CPU's uh branch predictor is

doing a good job figuring out I'm not going to need to go down to the branch but then above some threshold as as it goes up as the productivity goes up it's getting more predictions wrong and so now you're paying this overhead of having to you know roll back the changes in your pipeline and go back and whereas the red line the no branching one it's a fixed cost so no matter what I'm doing that copy assuming I can do that efficiently and then I don't pay the penalty of of of uh of any branch or

jumps because I'm just always doing it and whether or not I overwrite the last one or not depends on whether the predicate gets satisfied to true. All right. So we're going to design code in this way. Again it seems counterintuitive as humans and the compiler isn't going to do this for you. This is something you know we would have to write and most of the modern OB systems are going to do this. All right. So the next thing we got to do is how can we speed this up even further? Taking advantage of modern CPU

instructions. SIMD. Who here doesn't know what SIMD is? Who here knows what SIMD is? S. All right. Everyone does. Fantastic. Good. All right. So here's our our simple branchless version of the code before and then now I'm going to vectorize it using CID right and again this is pseudo code but whatever like you you load in a vector of tup of tupils I load them into my CID registers and then I'm going to apply my my predicate and I'm not defining how I'm going to do this in in

CID I'll do that in a second and then I'm going to take the output of that that uh those predicates that are sitting in SIM registers and I'm going to convert that back into my uh to my something I put I can put my output buffer right so give more specific example here so say that I want to run this query select start from table where key is greater than n and less than u and then my my table looks like this like simple vector right so what I'm going to do is I'm going to take the the

keys I want to evaluate I'm going to load them into a to a cd register and there's instructions explicitly to do that and there's different size of cyd registers like 1024 or the new AVX 10 or whatever from from Intel goes is a 1024 AVX 512 is probably more common. So 512 bits, but you can say I'm storing um you I can store either you four byt values, eight byt values, sometimes they go down to to to two byt values, right? I can have I have different lanes I I can store things in. Right? So I'm going to

do my cyd compare based on the constant that I'm trying to look up here. I'm going to get a mask there vector that says here's the, you know, for each lane in my CID register whether the predicate evaluated the true or not. So I'll do that for the first part where key is greater than equal to n and I'll do that same thing for now the second part the key less than than zero. Now I have two bit vectors that correspond to whether that the predicate evaluated to true. So those are both of these are going to be

sitting in CID registers. And now I have a SIMD instruction to do an and again cross the lanes, right? And then that's going to determine now which which the which offsets in my in my input vector satisfy the predicate. So then now I need again I need to convert this to something I can then use for identifying which tupils in my input vector satisfy the predicate. So I'll just maintain a a vector of offsets like in this case here 0 to 7 just corresponds to offsets here in my my input data and then now I use a CID

compress instruction that converts basically the where any of the ones or any one that's set to to true in my input vector mask three corresponds to the offset into the in my offset array. And then now I get a an align vector that tells me here's the offsets that satisfy the predicate. So I can rip through this super fast. And so now again with that's now why we want to do the vectorz uh query processing model. The naming's bad, right? I'm using vectorized instructions to do this vectorzed

processing. But I'm also doing this in the vectoring vectorzed query processing model or the batch model. So I can take a batch of these tupless rip through it with SIMD. So my predicates can all be cindified. Uh and I can do this very very quickly. And this what this is what the um the the co-founder Snowflake this is one of the cool the big things that he helped developed uh when he built a system called Vector Wise that came out of CWI. Again, same place where Duck DB is. And then Vector Wise got bought by Ingress

for like pennies. And then he so he quit that and then he hooked up with the two dudes from Oracle and they they found a Snowflake and Snowflake is doing Snowflake sort of was one of the leading systems that did this but everyone does this now. All right. So another cool thing you can do with Cindy is all the other different operations we talked about throughout the semester. There's SIMD versions of them. Not all of them are as good at not all of them can be easily vectorized with SIMD because oftentimes when you fall out of

the CPU cache things get super slow because you have to go do go loads and store gets memory. Um but there's if you can align things nicely you can you can do a lot of cool things. All right. So we talked we talked about how to do probing in a hash table before right. So the scalar version the cydi version for a single key hash it then do a single probe and just you can just do our linear scan till we find our match. Right? So if you want to sdify or vectorize it this is using what's called horizontal vectorzation. There's

a vertical one where you sort of look at things uh top to down but the this one's more common. So now I'm going to have in my hash table with every single sort of row I'm going to have four keys and that are packed together and I'm going to have my my four values and the keys themselves I could store the you know I I need to have the original key because I have to do my check to see whether this thing matches uh when I land in my hash table. But since you have variable length uh keys,

often times what you'll do is also store as another vector in here the actual the fingerprint of the hash. So your hash might be 32 bits or 64 bits. Maybe I'll keep it like eight bits around. Uh so I can just do in SIMD very quickly is my 8bit prefix of my hash match the 8 bit prefix of this other hash. That's a single you know you can do that very quickly. It's just integer comparison. If it doesn't match, then you know the full key is never going to match anyway. So you just ignore it. So now when I

want to do a a lookup here, I'll take my single key hash it just like before. But then now when I land in a in in a in a slot in my hash table, I'm getting back four keys in my example here. And now I just use SIMD to do do the comparison I did before. Get back a uh a bit mask that tells me which one is matched. And then based on those I can then go find the thing that I'm actually looking for. >> Why is that faster? >> Why is this faster? >> Yeah, >> because so the question is why is this

faster? Because when I go probe in the hash table, I'm, you know, that's a cache line lookup. I'm gonna go get 64 bytes, right? And so for that 64 bytes, if I can put more things in there, do then do SIMD comparison instead of having to do, you know, for loop one at a time, this is way faster because otherwise it's like say if it's a cyd loop like a for loop, I'm going to go for each element. Let's say I need to look at four keys. I got to look at each key separately. That's one instruction.

Whereas in SIMD, I can do all four in a single instruction. Yeah. Yes, you have to load in registers, right? But like also too, I'm showing like four, you know, four lanes. With AX 512, assuming you have like 32-bit integers, you can put a lot more, right? This would be like 128 bit registers, which is like Intel had in the 90s. The question is like uh you're advertising the cost because all most of these are fail. >> Yes. >> Yeah. So like it's it's way faster way faster to use versus for this.

And again the trick is instead of just trying to like my example I was trying to match going back here. I'm trying to match on the on on on single keys at a time, right? Or single elements of of a of a key like a single character. So my keys might be kind of large. So I'll I instead of doing the CID comparison on the full key, which if their variable length may not be the same for every, you know, for all the elements in my my bucket of four that I'm getting within the slot, I use the hash prefix and that

guarantees they're always this fixed length. All right. So what I've shown so far of how we take the data out from one operator or one sort of step of an operator and pass it along to the next one. This is called using what are called selection vectors. Right? And the idea here is that the when the operator is going to spit out it would be offsets into my input vectors that correspond to these are the tupils that I want to pass up to the to the next operator. Right? So be like fixed length offsets within

so my my input array. Right? You can also some systems will do bit maps instead. So think of this as like there's a one or zero corresponding to whether a tupil within a batch that's being passed up from one oper whether they've satisfied the predicate and they should be continued processing as you go up. So maybe the case in a in a and you saw this in in in in the bus stop projects maybe the case I pass up a vector and I apply some predicate but only one of them is going to match. So I

need a way to represent how I then pass up that batch and say ignore all the other ones that are that that don't match because they didn't match down below only look at this one. And then sometimes what you want to do is have a staging buffer to say I get you know I get up 1024 tupils but only one of them match. So instead of me passing up a 1024 tupil or 1024 buffer that only has one to a matching, I'll just wait for more things come below me, then fill fill up the buffer and then send up a a

dense buffer going up. And different systems do different things. There's trade-offs for all of these. >> Yes. >> Question are systems that do this adaptively. you could but like you basically have to implement two of them like twoations. [snorts] All right. So that's that's using uh SIMD and and to to you know in modern hardware to speed things up. Um we're not we don't talk about GPUs. We in in in the previous version 721 that is actually becoming a hot area now. Uh there was a bunch of

GPU databases last decade. they kind of didn't go anywhere because they had to store all of them. You had to store the entire database down down in the in the the GPU card, right? With the NV link and some of the newer stuff Nvidia is doing in in newer versions of PCIe, uh this is changing and I can't say too much, but there's some major things happening within next year. You'll see a bunch of GPU more GPU databases coming out. So, uh but basically it's the [clears throat] the

same principles they talked about with SIMD will apply in the GPU world as well. That's that's what I mentioned is all right. So I'm going to talk about a how we do code specialization now through code generation. So the you know in [clears throat] bus hub the way it works is like you're given a query plan you basically walk the tree and then within that you get a an expression tree and you have to walk that to produce you know to evaluate predicates and so forth right so there was a very famous project

called haiku out of the university of Edinburgh in the early 2010s um where for a given SQL query they would generate the plan and then they would convert that plan tree into actual machine code sorry C code they would then invoke GCC C to then compile that function for the run that query into a shared object, link it in and then and invoke that. So you don't do that in the interpretation you would do in bus hub or like post and other systems. Now I basically have a hard-coded program that executes exactly what my query wants to

do. And that's going to be way faster because I don't have to do jumping. I don't have to do traversals or follow pointers in a query plan tree. It's it's hardcoded baked for doing exactly what the query wants. So here's what again this is what bus would normally look like. If I scan through my table, I got to go get a tupil. I got to go figure out what the tub looks like. I go to the catalog, get some stuff, and then I apply my predicate by running all these steps. So, instead, what I want to do is

I want to have a a a program that basically hardcodes in. Here's the the tupils I'm looking at. Here's the predicates I I want to consider, and here's the offsets to go find that the attributes that I want. And then now I'm just running CPU instructions to to do these computations and not worry about like you know trying to interpret what's the size of the table or what size of a tupil and how to jump to my slot arrays to find things that I want. I can rip through things way more efficiently this

way. >> What's that? >> The question is can we just use an offshelf compiler GCC in this example? Yes. Um, in in most database systems, except for the Germans, they're gonna you use use an offtheshelf compiler. >> The question is, is that is this fast enough? No. So, we'll fix that in a second. Maybe I can jump to that now. Yes. Question. >> Is any system try to use a jet system? uh the Germans. Yes. And what they do I don't I should have this. What they do

is the first version they they in hyper they would uh query shows up instead of emitting C++ code or C code they would emit LLVM IR and then they would let the LM compile that into machine code and run that because it was it was you know it was faster to run to generate the IR rather than C because then you GCC and that's slow right in the newer version in Umbra which now also is commercialized as Cedar DB and I don't have slides for this what they do is they emit their own IR R and then they have a another pass

that can convert that IR into assembly that they roll by hand. Then they run the assembler which is fast and cheap to do and they then they start running the query based on the assembled version. Then in the background they run LLVM to compile their IR into like machine code with like 03 turned on which that can take sec you know second or milliseconds. And the idea is that if the query finishes with the assembled version assembler version, then you're done, right? But if it's still running

by the time LLM finishes, then they slide out the the assembled version and plop in their their compile shared object. >> Like like how does it like the way they orchestrate the system to get work done like the schedule tasks like when it goes says all right, I want to run this task. It would say, "All right, I need I need to do this operation on this piece of data. Is my compiled version ready? If yes, invoke that. If not, invoke the assembler." Insane, right? So, this sounds amazing.

I would say though, we built an LM based uh query engine that did this just in time compilation stuff. It's a nightmare to debug. And we'll see this when we talk about data bricks in a second. Like, you got to have people that know about compilers and they got to know about databases. And then now when you crash in these systems because it's it's like dynamic code being generated for a query you're not landing in like well if you generate C you can you can you can do this but like if you're doing the JIT

compilation going directly for lm IR then compiling that when you crash you land there with with symbols or sorry without symbols to know exactly here's the line of code in your C++ application that generated this IR that caused this crash. It's a nightmare to debug. So the Huh. what what generated the IR that's the part you got to fix from the data set right and so the Germans they wrote their own debugger so that they can reverse back based on masilla RR to reverse back like here's here's the line

of code that generated this this IR for me like you would think the guy's on cocaine but he's not it's insane right like like his his his vice is apple juice right and it's one guy sorry um all right so to the point like is is this compilation thing expensive. Yes, this is actually not a new idea. IBM did this back in the 1970s with system R. They would generate the assembly for a query plan uh and they would run that. But again, they had the same problem that any time that the system crashed,

you had to go figure out what assembly created this assembly to figure out what what was the mistake. Actually, I think system was written in C. The same idea. Or the other problem is every single time you change the API, the storage the storage system, then you got to go change all the compiler code, right? Because again, it was it was early days. they didn't have good good abstractions. So an alternative is to what what vector wise came out with and again what what snowflake does uh and what a lot of

systems follow along is do what are called pre-ompile primitives and the idea is that in your data system source code in your repository you pre-bake and automatically generate all these these primitives for different predicates you may evaluate uh for any particular query like integer column equals integer integer column less than integer right think of all those separate operations a separate function that you then have you you can autoerate generate all these through templates in your codebase and

then when you you compile the binary then that binary itself is now all these different primitives that you then stitch together at runtime uh based on what the the query wants to do and then now you don't about jitting things because you have basically things all together and you're kind of assembling the the building blocks for a query plan just through pointers >> the statement is the orchestration cost is going to be high. Yeah. So the jump call is expensive. Aha. But if you do

batches of tupils, then that amortizes the jump call. That's how you get if it's doing tupil at a time. No. If it's if it's a batch tupils again, what what the snowflake guy would he he figured out like this? This is how you can do this. All right. So say in my query like this again, I'm doing a string column lookup on ADC and integer column look up on four, right? So I would have a separate primitive to do a take a vector tupils in to do string column equals something you know

constant and in this case here I would have another one for the integer column but now you see now I'm passing along the positions offset right so I can I can chain these things together take the output of one and then feed it into another one and then it would know that you know should I should I this this position thing is is if it's not my position vector then I know I should ignore it in my input column. So even though the number couple the number of possible permutations you can have in a query plan for these

predicates is infinite uh but in actuality it's actually a finite number right there's only like so many different data types so many different things you can do with them right something equals something something less than something so forth right something equals a column two columns the same right so this is what this is what snowflake does this is what um this is what uh photon does data bricks, right? The the current research says this is the right way to build your systems, not do the jet compilation

stuff. Yes. >> Question. Do you need a codegen framework? Yeah, but it's not hard. >> No, it's not like like here's two right here, right? Like something equals something, something less than something. It's not you again, you only have certain number of data types. And the reason why this is better than JIP compilation because now if there's a bug in this primitive, if it crashes, then I'm I'm in, you know, I can go through GDB or whatever and go walk through and

figure out how to reproduce the crash. All right, we got 10 minutes. Um, I can't cover all these. Um, let's do a vote. We'll pick two. Uh, I'm going to keep count. Raise your hand if you want BigQuery. Raise your hand if you want Snowflake. A little more original want red shift. Very few. Okay. Want yellow brick. I might override you because yellow brick is insane. Ra want data bricks photon. All right. That's a clear winner. And went click house. All right. We'll do we'll do data bricks.

>> Oh [ __ ] All right. We'll do data bricks yellow brick and I'll try to get click quickly. I'll click click is a quick thing to mention. lot people already gave a talk. All right, I just let me show one thing about Snowflake. The dude that wrote again I keep mentioning this guy Marcen who like invented all the stuff invented like the vector stuff that stuff. This is how hardcore he is about databases. This is a this is a photo I took. This is his leg. He got the snowflake tattoo because

he loves his database so much. That's how serious people are about these things. You think I'm crazy about databases? Like he's he's he's in there with me. Okay, databicks. So, databicks is based on spark. What was spark written in? Anybody know what query language or so what programming language? >> Scala. >> Scola. What does Scola run in? >> JVM. JVM is terrible. Don't use it. Right. So, they had this problem where like they had this original version of

um of uh this this thing Spark SQL that was doing the the JIT compilation stuff. They would emit Scola bte code that would then compile to the JVM. But then they found themselves struggling with uh getting good performance because you got to get people again who know compilers and know databases and also know how to deal with the JVM. So they spent more time trying to modify the code to generate the you do instrumentation the JVM rather than making the query engine go faster right because again spark was

originally written as a tuple at a time row based system. And obviously again with snowflake and all these other stuff we talked about the entire semester we know we don't want to do this. So what photon is is a is a runtime written in C++ that integrates connects into the JVM through JNI the Java native interface and then at certain points when they execute a query they they recognize I have a C++ version of the thing you want to do like something equals something they can then hand it off to the C++ code who then could do

the run that more efficiently and then send the data back into to to the JVM right so there's a paper called Photon I'm just pointing out here there's a bunch of my former students students have taken uh 721 or sorry 445 like you guys they're all a lot of students at snowflake a lot of people work on this project all right so what is photon it's shared disc executive storage uh it's doing pbased vectorized processing pre-ompile primitives expression function we talked about before um we

won't talk about the operator too much but again the core idea that photon is doing is this these pre-ompile operator primitives or kernels the same thing I just talked about with vector wise and snowflake right they generate all the possible things you could want to do on data they pre-ompile them and then at runtime they're stitching them together and to recognize these are the things I can and fall out into the C++ and if they don't have a C++ version of it then it just falls back and runs the regular the JVM

version as they normally would right and they comment how again in their experience it was much much easier to build a uh this the C++ based engine that these pre pre-ompile primitives than it was to instrument the GVM and do just time compilation so even though the first version of this of their implementation wasn't as fast as the the JIT version was, but they spent all their time now actually making the the pre-ompiled stuff actually faster and they can get uh they would get they get bigger improvements and got faster than

than they would have if they were still mucking around the GVM. >> Uh I don't for the numbers here. I mean it's quite significant. There's there's other tricks they do like if you they assume that you know it even though column may not be declared as not null. Sorry column might be declared as supporting nulls. They assume maybe it doesn't it's not null. So they there's a bunch of checks they avoid and then if they get it wrong they roll back. There's some things like that do as

well. >> The question is can I just keep the summary summary that they don't see any nulls. If I'm reading a bunch of paret files or CSV files that I've never seen before, I don't have that. So I got to guess. There's there's other tricks you can use like JSON like since JSON's untyped or barely typed. you can say, "Oh, I I know that like most of these times in this this field, it's going to be an an integer and then only if you see a string, then you fall back and do

something else." All right. So, they're going to do a technique called also expression fusion. So, this is we talked about operator fusion before. We can kind of take the um uh you know, if I have like a a a scan with a predicate, instead of having them be two separate operators, I can put the the the predicate inside the scan operator, right? Right. So that's that's operator fusion. They're doing expression fusion because they're doing the these predefined uh these pre-ompiled primitives. So instead of

having the two functions I showed before where I'm I'm one predicate is doing the the check on the you know on the on the first part of the conjunct and the second one's doing the second part, they can just pre-generate a bunch of these ones that can do both together. Like they could rewrite this query into being a between clause and then now it's one less function call to go process all the data, right? Another cool thing they do with the the shuffle phase that we talked about before is that they can they can

determine whether one partition gets too full because the data is skewed. Then they can after the shuffle completes they can go back and and repartition it again. Kind of like the recursive partition we talked about with hash joints. So say that I have my worker filling up all these these these partitions, right? And then I recognize that these two guys these three these three partitions are underutilized and the the one in the middle over there and the one in the end are kind of getting too full. So what I can do is I can

dynamically say, all right, I'm going to start rewriting uh the data that I have in these guys into this other one and fill that up and just pass along the the the the next the next three. So then I can down I can sort of automatically downsize or upsize the number of workers I have after each shuffle phase based on the data I see going in. All right, let me talk about yellow brick just because I find it super again this this super fascinating. So it's a new engine written in C++. They forked

it about 10 years ago. Um, and I said this in a class. I said this about them in one of one of these lectures at some point and I forgot I said it. And then when I went to go visit them in London a few uh a few months ago, they told me what I said. And then their marketing people love it because they they they actually sell it to customers based on what I said. So Yellow Brick does things like the Germans you would you would only do if you if you were on cocaine. The amount of system optimization

they're doing, you would not want to do if you're a brand new startup, but this is what they did. So what is it? It's a shared disc storage system. They're doing pushbased vectorization. They're doing transpolation the the codegen stuff we talked about. Instead of generating LM the IR, they're generating C++ and then GCC compiling that. But they can they can hash that. But then the engineering stuff they do is insane. So it's so they have a row store that's based on post the front end query shows

up. If they have the cache uh query plan, they reuse it. Otherwise, they'll they'll compile in the background and then run it when it's available. What's insane though is the the communication channels that they have in between the the object store which is like S3 and the different workers themselves. So these guys said that the like the MVME drivers and the the Harvard drivers that Linux gives you or the Harvard vendors give you were way too slow. So not only they they have to build the runtime

engine for the database system, they wrote their own kernel drivers for the MVME drive drives they were running on and for the nicks. And then TCP was too slow. So they rewrote they wrote their own network protocol based on UDP uh to make that go fast. But then copying data from the nick down, you know, down the hardware through the kernel up into user space, that's too slow, too, because the kernel is slow for us. So they're going to use what's called SPDK or DPDK to do kernel bypass where you basically

they're managing their own TCP IP stack in user space and don't let the OS do anything. So when yellow brick turns on they call Maloc get a bunch of memory take control of the hardware and they never talk to the operating system ever again because the operating system is going to ruin your life. And these guys took took that to the extreme right? If you're a brand new startup you would not do this. This is insane. But this is what they did 10 years ago and because they were coming from the the fintech

world >> question how's it different RDMA I mean RDMA is sort of the same thing but you need specialized hardware for this for DBDK and SPDK you don't need specialized hardware right you can you can run that on Amazon yes >> uh question really quick there's another one from Stanford as well but like there's other they did they did this 10 years ago yeah it's not standard but like so that if you need specialized hardware it's not going to work in the cloud Right. For you can do you can use UDP

everywhere. All right. The last one you guys wanted was was click. All right. So I want to say quickly about click house. So this came out of Yandex. I think they started building actually 2009. And I when the guy came gave a talk like as I said like when when when this came Click House became public. I thought it was fake because not because it was Russian because it was like the things that they were listing that they were doing was actually kind of at par or a little more advanced than what Snowflake was doing

at the time back in like 2016. And it seemed insane that this company I've never heard of or sorry, I heard of Yandex, but this system I've never heard of just showed up on the on the on the block having all these amazing features. Um, but again, it's something I've been working on on for a while. So again, they're doing pull-based uh vector query processing. There's a share architecture, although you can support the cloud stuff, the S3 stuff as well. They're doing uh they'll compile the

expressions the same way Postgress does. Um, their query optimizer is not very good. Uh, they know this. They publicly say this is something to work on. query merge is actually terrible. The postest one is probably better. Um, but for the things, you know, they're doing single table queries, it's okay. It's the joins that cause the problems. Um, [snorts] I want to talk about what they do for hash joins, but in particular the on the hashts. So, Click House comes with 24 different implementations of hashts.

Nobody does that in in their system. Even the yellow brick guys aren't aren't that crazy, right? because they have specialized uh hash tables for every single possible data type that you have. So I'm going to show one graph here, right? This is doing a join with the group eye. Um this from a paper from from few years ago, but this ended up making it into the uh into the real clickout system. It's just showing that like the like they have all these different actually they don't have all of these

but like the one that they added here is like if you have uh you're trying to do join on strings a linear probe hash table just off the shelf one is not going to perform that well but if you have different hash table implementations think of like you know doing compile time optimizations how to pack the data into the slots based on different sizes whether you exceed a cache line or not then you can get much much better performance. So this is sort of like the pre-ompiled primitives that we saw like if I'm doing a comparison on

like this key on this type or this this this constant, I can have a a specialized version of that function to do that comparison. They're basically doing the same thing but for hash tables for all the different possible data types and the lookups you want want to do on that. And that part's super amazing. They do a bunch of SIM stuff as well where they they try to have different versions of of different operators that areified for different different versions of SIM on Intel. So there's in there's AVX 512, AVX 256.

Sometimes the fivetail one doesn't is not as fast as the 256 one because the the older CPUs would actually throttle down the the frequency because they overheated. So they would they would be able to detect and say I'm going to run the AVX2 version, the 256 version instead of the 512 based on what hardware they're running on. It's it's amazing. All right, so let me switch over to the Rational I speaker way over time. But again, the the the main take away from from all I want you guys from

all this is that like these systems are doing um you know it's it's amazing stuff and you try to get things run as fast as possible is really challenging to do. Got it. All right. So remember the haiku system we talked about before they did that early compilation stuff. This is the same school. They're very strong in databases. Lennon, thank you so much for being here. The floor is yours. Go for it. >> Okay. So I'm I'm starting right. >> Yes. Go for it. >> Yeah. Okay. Right. Okay. So uh do we

understand SQL and if not why? Right. Okay. So I'm spending uh just a tour couple of things about myself. So I'm spending uh most of my time at relational AI um and uh I represent relational Paris and I'm also parttime at the University of Edinburgh where I was full-time for two decades prior to relational AI. Okay. So last time relational I was here in uh you know presenting CMU. So uh we talked about real which is a programming language that we develop in relational AI programming language for relational

data. uh if you're interested in that you can see there was a recorded talk by Martins about 10 15 minutes and there was a paper in Sigmot with details of the language and but we did not in that talk we didn't fully explain what were the SQL problems that we tried to fix and that by itself would require a very long talk but what I'll try to do today in the short time that I have I'll try to give you a taste of SQL problems that we are uh that that we're trying to fix okay so you all know what SQL is Right.

Okay. So it's like the language for relational database. It was a standard since ' 86 international standards since 87 implemented all over the place. If you look at the top programming languages according to it E. So this year it's at number four. If you look at the uh job ads and which which jobs which jobs require knowledge of SQL last year it was number one. This year it fell just below Python at number two. Right. So now SQL has been with us since ' 86. It was standardized and there were

like several standard went through several iterations. Uh uh 92 was when it was um basically reached its current state and after that uh we we now leave with SQL 2023. Uh we are on the way to produce SQL 2027. There are a whole bunch of editions in between. It's not free. If you want to buy it, it will make you about $2,000 per. And it consists of 11 parts uh which are numbered by random numbers between 1 and 16. So don't expect it to be consecutive. Uh there are actually reasons for this but not for this talk.

And what all DBMS implement is essentially the core which is the part two that's called SQL foundation. There are some discrepancies plus something else from the standard plus something else not from the standard but that's the world we live in. All right. who designs it. It's a committee with this fantastic name ISOIC JTC1623. Again, each part of this name actually has a meaning. So that's the picture of the committee from its last meeting in Barcelona uh just a couple months ago,

right? And uh the way it works uh is that uh so most of the technical work happens inside uh another organization called insights which stands for international committee on information technology standards despite the name international in it it's actually very UScentric uh though half of the committee is from Europe and Asia but you only can be in this committee if you're representing US registered entity so discussions in this committee lead to papers that are then forwarded to the international committee

that meets a few times a year Then basically decisions are made in that committee. People vote first in the committee and then the papers get incorporated into draft standards and then the national body. So each nation will have its own uh standards committee. They'll vote to approve those standards. This vote happens in several stages and eventually that's why there's such a clock usually four five years between additions of standards and eventually the standard is approved and then the fun begins. Okay, let's start

with a little fun. you know something that you all know about SQL or learn about SQL I have two relations RNS uh all both have single attribute A and I ask you to compute the difference between those two relations let's not worry about multisense let's not worry about bag semantics let's say everything is a set okay there are three ways you can do it you can just directly use SQL except operator to compute the difference or you can use the sub query you can say give me everything in the relation R

that's not in the relation Or you can use exists for a sub query. You can say give me everything from relation r such that there does not exist something in relation s that's equal to it. So if you ask you you students uh to write this type of query you will write one of those and you would expect to get full marks because you run it over the set and say okay well same answer they're equivalent queries. In fact, lots of SQL programmers think that they in queries. But let me change a little

bit. Let me replace two with a null in this query. And then suddenly what I get is three different answers, right? And I can assure you that huge number of people who write SQL queries, they fall into similar traps, right? you know the change not in not exists and you know suddenly you can see that there's a very dramatic difference between writing is not in and not exists all right so we have a bit of a problem right but let me tell you that we have even a bigger problem with understanding

SQL what is simpler in SQL and select star right the first thing that you do like you learn SQL select star from R right from some table this is a table okay so I'll make a claim that absolute Majority of SQL programmers actually don't know what select star does, right? So let me explain this on an example. So okay, so let's say we have a relation R against single attribute A value one and I write this query like repeat attribute A twice in the output, right? Okay, so that's going to give me this relation

with attribute A repeated twice. Every DBMS will give you the same thing. Now I say this let's use it as a sub query and say let's select star from that sub query like I literally plug this query Q from above I just plug it into this line in front and I ask you what this query returns and in my experience actually of talking to people directly I asked this and even like talking to students when I teach in front of the class and people start guessing and say well maybe it will return the same as before maybe not

maybe it will give an error what's going to happen. I mean this is one line query. We select star a relation has one tpple and people start scratching their heads and there's a very good reason why they scratch their heads because the answer to this question is depends on which system you run this query. Posgress and SQL light will give you one star will give you basically as above but Oracle SQL server my scale and z2 will all give a compile time and db now will all give a compile time error.

Okay. Already like one line queries select star. We are getting into trouble. But now let's let's get into more trouble. Okay. Uh I ask okay let's run this query. Give me everything from R where the condition is that this query Q prime the one that we just saw that sometimes run sometimes gives a compile time time error. And when this query returns something what will this do? You know most people say oh well probably you know it will give you R if it runs on posgress and SQL light maybe compile time error if it

runs if it doesn't run the answer is no it will always give it relation right so you see the the thing is that like with this super super simple queries I can get uh I can start like with super simple devices in SQL I can start writing queries that even experienced SQL programmers will start questioning What's going on? Okay, let's come back more fun business. Let's say I have a database that has orders and payments, right? We have order and we know that sometimes some of the orders

have been paid and I ask you to write a query. Give me unpaid orders. Okay, give me all the orders for there is no payment. Fine. You know, this is very very simple query. You know, let's run it in SQL. What we going to get? Well, in this database, we are going to get that order two and order three are not paid. Right? We know intuitively it's wrong because we know that there are two payments, right? It's uh you know how do we know that both of these order two and order three are not paid. We don't know

this. It's quite possible that one of them is uh is actually paid. But SQL will tell you that order two and order three are unpaid. Imagine then then you go and chase the customer and say you didn't pay. The customer say I paid and then you know then the customer never comes back. So we get what's called false positives, right? So answer that we know it's not true and actually this false positives they're fairly common right so we try to experiment a little bit with TPCH like

queries and populate database with nulls and this false positives pop up all the time right and uh yeah I also would like to point out that you know most of the time you see graphs coming from sigma papers but this is a very unusual creature it's a graph that comes from a pods paper from a school paper okay so nulls are all over the is right you know if you if you are European and you want to go to Texas and you ask for the weather they tell you don't ask about Celsius only Fahrenheit you know you can

be ask for a payment on your multiple nulls and this is actually a screenshot of a real database of a big retailer right and you can see the love nulls and nulls cause problems like you know there are like all the stories about actually it's a real story about a person whose last name is null and who cannot do anything in this life anymore Now that everything has to be recorded in the database in not null fields and uh so when nulls appear we know that things kind of go bad right you know like in textbooks that add that you know

well null treatment is fundamentally at odds with the way the world behaves. books for sick database professionals tell you you get wrong answers to queries you cannot trust answers and like there are even like headlines like you know this is this is from BBC that children heart surgery halted by incomplete data right so it could be quite dramatic okay uh so there's one other question I want to briefly address and this is how standard is the standard right we have the standard we assume that everybody

has to do the same stuff but actually if we run multiple queries on different databases we we know sort of from experience that some of them will give you different results. So we try to quantify that and from a random query generator about 2% of queries for the most basic fragment they behave differently. Some issues admittedly are just minor and very syntactic but some some are serious. So, I'll give you two examples of serious issues, right? Of things that could be unexpected. >> We're kind of a little over time. We're

over time. Sorry. >> Ah, okay. It's 10 minutes. Okay. I'll uh Yeah, I'll just I'll just I'll just wrap up with this, right? So, and basically and say, you know, why we find this questions problematic in SQL? Because SQL standard has been growing crazily, right? It started with 10 page quotes paper, then 100 pages per SQL standard. Now we at 4,500 pages. There's not a single person in the world who knows everything and what we are trying to do in relational is to have a different

approach to have a small well- definfined core language with a clear semantics and then extended by libraries. So this is what this is our approach. This is what language sh is. >> All right. So again for the two things again this is last class. See you guys on Thursday next week. Uh, and then the last thing also too is that we got a announcement from Farnum this morning and the good news is that DJ Cash won most dank DJ at Carnegie Melon University this year. It's a round of applause.

Can you get a photo here? So, [laughter] here. Yeah. Hey, handshake. You got it. Awesome. >> Awesome. All right, guys. Give a round of applause to you cash. Thank you, Lennon. And then good luck with your final exams and everything else. And then again, Saturday office hours, Sunday project due Thursday next week is the final exam. Okay. [music] Acrobats over [music] a track. [music] That's what [music] we're track for. Get [music] the fortune [ __ ] maintain flow with the grain. Get the fortune [music]

[ __ ] maintain flow with the gra.

